General Introduction
====================

What is connectivity?
---------------------

Connectivity is defined, for the purposes of this thesis, as the movement of individuals between spatially discrete populations [@cowen2009]. These connected populations are defined as a metapopulation [@hanski1998]. Metapopulations within the marine context, while having similarities with terrestrial metapopulations, are primarily focused on linking populations through the dispersal and recruitment of larvae [@sale2006a]. Connectivity within a metapopulation can be highly volatile due to intrinsic (e.g. low exchange of individuals) or extrinsic (e.g. natural variation in currents) events. Connectivity is a fundamental dynamic of metapopulations, however for many species is still a vaguely understood process [@cowen2007].

Broad statement on thesis. What is this thesis trying to achieve?
-----------------------------------------------------------------

Connectivity is the key concept that links all the data chapters within this thesis. The broad aim is to contribute to the understanding of processes that influence the dispersal and connectivity patterns of ichthyoplankton. This aim is achieved through: a meta-analysis comparing published studies to see what parameters have been found to be influential; collecting data on the connectivity influencing ontogenetic vertical distribution of larval fish; using theoretical models to test the effects of different behaviours and strategies; and finally by applying this knowledge to predict the connectivity patterns of a temperate reef fish and compare it with current conversation networks.

Why is connectivity important?
------------------------------

(Life cycle of fish) Many marine species, including many species of reef fish, possess a two-stage lifecycle: pelagic larval and sessile adult stages. For larval fish, the differences in the morphology, habitat and behaviour between these two stages can be stark [@leis2000]. Connectivity between populations (and within metapopulations) occurs solely during this pelagic larval phase, unlike terrestrial animal species where connectivity mostly occurs through migrating adults. Pelagic larvae can disperse over huge distances, hundreds or potentially thousands of kilometres, therefore detecting connectivity can be difficult. The closest terrestrial similarity is with seed dispersal, but unlike seeds, fish larvae have inherent behaviours that can influence their dispersal [@cowen2009].

Reef fish lay eggs, either attached to a benthic substrate, or broadcast spawned, in huge numbers. Egg production can range from the tens of thousands to millions, a strategy designed to offset the extremely high mortality rate for larval fish [i.e. greater than 99.95%; @houde1989]. Upon hatching, larval fish are not fully developed, and undergo morphological changes before becoming a juvenile. The ontogenetic stages of larval fish are defined as related to the development of the caudal (tail) fin. Larval fish possess a notochord, which during the stage of flexion, bends upwards at approximately 45 degrees, starting the formation of the caudal fin. It is with the development of this fin that larvae start to develop swimming abilities, changing them from plankton to nekton [@leis2006]. The other ontogenetic stages are referred to a preflexion (the notochord is straight), and postflexion (the caudal fin is fully developed). During this period they develop a suite of behaviours that can influence connectivity; from vertical migration [@paris2004a], to the ability to swim at speeds greater than the surrounding currents [@fisher2000], and sense and orientate in the direction of settlement habitat [@gerlach2007a]. The period the fish spends in this larval stage is called the pelagic larval duration (PLD). The PLD ends when the larvae settle, which requires them to be developed enough to swim and sense suitable settlement habitat. The length of this period is species-specific, but despite some variability, there is typically similarity within a taxonomic level [genus or family, [@victor2000; @wilson1999]. Variation within PLDs arise due to individual larva having flexibility in about the timing of settlement, albeit there are certain physiological limitations on the earliest and latest timing of settlement.

(Population dyanmics) Besides births and deaths, connectivity is the key process that defines the local populations dynamics within a metapopulation. Noting in marine systems the definition of a local populations can be a non-trivial task due to to the fluid environment, and often any movement of adults is ignored [@grimm2003]. Local populations within a metapopulation can rely on stable connectivity from source populations in order to persist. The connectivity of interest in this thesis is this ecologically relevant connectivity, i.e. demographic connectivity whereby dispersal effects population growth and persistence [@gotelli1991], and not genetic connectivity, which requires only a few individuals to be exchanged [@slatkin1993].

(MPA connectivity) Understanding these dynamics is crucial for the conservation and management of metapopulations [@roberts1997], yet connectivity has often been overlooked when considering marine protected areas [@crowder2006]. Historically, habitat quality and habitat preservation have been the main priorities for marine conservation. These are both important facets of population conservation, but do not address population persistence through recovery from disturbance which connected populations provide [@almany2009]. Connectivity is becoming a key consideration when designing MPAs, with the aim of constructing a network of protected areas [@botsford2009; @christie2010; @abesamis2016]. However, designing a unified network its not without its difficulty as marine species have different dispersal distances and the natural variation of extrinsic factors. Dynamic marine protected systems is recent paradigm [@smith2007] that can be utilised in conservation management to address this flux inherent in connectivity patterns [@soria2014].

-	General meaning
-	bipartite Life styles etc.

---

-	Understanding population dynamics
-	Many species with bipartite life cycles.
-	Conservation, e.g. MPAs

How do we measure connectivity ?
--------------------------------

: Biophyscial dispersal modelling - General backgorund and what does it mean

A collection of processes contributes to the connectivity between reefs: spawning production, dispersal by ocean currents, larvae behaviours (e.g. swimming), survival, settlement behaviour and post-settlement survival (Cowen & Sponaugle 2009). Therefore to understand connectivity both physical and biological processes must be considered. Connectivity is one of the more challenging problems to study empirically in marine ecology. Fish larvae are very small (1 - 8 mm), they can disperse over long distances and they suffer from high mortality. It is not practical (or possible) for a scientist to follow larvae from spawning to settlement. There are several current empirical techniques for measuring connectivity, which all suffer from labour-intensive methodologies and become less scalable as the dispersal distance increases. For larvae dispersing over hundreds of kilometres, knowing exactly where they settle is analogous to searching for a needle in a haystack. Several empirical techniques will be discussed further in the next section.

### Natural markers

The advantage of natural markers is that they are ubiquitous amongst larval fish. The most common natural marker used to measure dispersal is through genetics. While there are several different genetic methodologies for measuring dispersal, the most common technique is to use genetic markers to compare gene flow either between populations or using parentage analysis. Population level gene flow is the most common technique as it is empirically easier to measure. It involves comparing genetic micro-satellite markers between populations to see if discrete populations have been connected by exchange of breeding individuals [@doherty1995; @curley2009; @foster2012]. The caveat to this technique is that it only provides information to historical dispersal events, and it can be uncertain is the connectivity is direct or indirect between populations. Parentage analysis is a more arduous technique, requiring sampling of both parents and progeny to determine the dispersal, but provides information on recent dispersal events. Using genetic markers to identify the natal population of recruits gives estimates of dispersal distance [@williamson2016], and with sufficient sampling can indicate the levels of self-recruitment in populations [@jones2005; @herrera2016]. The downside is amount of sampling effort required, which becomes more difficult when considering different spatial and temporal scales. However, new methodologies have shown that dispersal kernels can be estimated by only sampling 3% of the population [@bode2018]. Recent advances in genetics means this is a constantly changing field, and provides great potential for better empirical measurements. Newer cutting edge techniques such as genetic assignment tests on allele frequencies can also give insight into the dispersal movement between populations [@simpson2014].

The natural elemental composition of an otolith can have markers of the waters the fish was born, and thus can give insight into the dispersal of larval fish [@campana1999]. For this technique to be effective, the spatial regions of interest must have identifiably different chemical signatures, otherwise the true birth location can be hard to ascertain [@thorrold2002]. An inherent difficulty is that in marine and freshwater systems, the environmental markers are in constant flux, therefore constant monitoring is required to confidently predict dispersal [@gillanders2002]. This technique has been used successfully to linking adults to their juvenile nurseries in estuaries [@gillanders2003].

### Physical tagging

One technique developed in the last 15 years is to mark the otoliths of ichthyoplankton using trans-generational techniques [@thorrold2006]. Adult females injected with enriched stable-isotopes (e.g. ^137^Ba), pass on the isotope into each egg, which goes onto to be incorporated into the otolith of the progeny, allowing for tracking of dispersal distance. The benefits of this technique is the reduction in effort, by only having to inject the female, which in turn marks all the eggs she produces. Also by using different concentrations of the stable-isotope, information about the specific natal location can be encapsulated. Studies have used this technique effectively to investigate connectivity of reef fish populations over small spatial scales [@almany2007], and even comparing inter-annual variability through exhaustive sampling [@cuif2015]. Another more labour intensive technique involves tagging clutches of eggs with fluorescent chemical markers [@thorrold2002; @jones2005]. The otoliths of the captured post-settlement juvenile fish can be removed and examined under a microscope for fluorescent staining. This method of staining is a blunter instrument, as the marker cannot be changed per location, and only marks a single dispersal event.

Directly measuring ichthyoplankton connectivity empirically with current techniques is not practical (or for all intensive purposes impossible). Larvae are minuscule (measured in mm) within a huge ocean matrix. Larval fish can have a pelagic larval duration ranging from weeks to months [@victor2000], giving them the ability to disperse long distances, combined with a high mortality rate [@houde1989], makes them difficult to track. Indirect methods, as described above, provide accurate measurements of dispersal success and distance, but they suffer from being labour intensive methods. Effort to measure connectivity increases with the spatial scales of connectivity to measure, and increases over temporal scales. For small scales, it provides better estimates of the entire dispersal kernel, but this becomes exponentially difficulty with increasing dispersal distance, e.g. large coastal dispersal. Also in many of these empirical methods, there is a lot of uncertainty in the results, mostly due to small sample sizes, although statistical tools have been developed to try and overcome these issues [@kaplan2007].

An common alternative method to empirical measurement, is to predict connectivity patterns using a biophysical dispersal modelling (BDM) approach [@paris2007a; @sponaugle2002; @treml2015]. The advantages of using predictive models over the empirical techniques described above is the ability to manipulate the model parameters, and therefore ask questions that cannot be easily achieved with empirical methods. BDM can be used over spatial extents from localised reefs [@andutta2012] to global connectivity [@wood2013], and to investigate temporal patterns at intra-annual [@robins2013] and inter-annual [@young2012] timescales. The other important value of BDM is in the ability to investigate the influence of different processes, both physical and biological (traits and behaviours), on the connectivity and dispersal kernels of ichthyoplankton. Combing BDMs with empirical evidence can provide even more powerful inference into the connectivity patterns of larval fish [@werner2007; @coscia2012; @foster2012].

BDMs are a mature research methodology, having been seen in the literature for three decades [@bartsch1988; @miller2007]. Comprised of coupled physical and biological models, BDMs underly the inherent complexity in measuring and understanding connectivity. The physical model is a numerical hydrodynamic model, often combined with data assimilation techniques of observation systems to resolve mesoscale and sub-mesoscale oceanographic processes, e.g. eddies. Recent advances in computer power have allowed researchers to construct high resolution circulation model for regional dynamics, or lower resolution modes for more expansive oceanic regions. The understanding of the dynamics of ocean circulation models is well understood, and confidence in these models is high. This is important, as dispersal by ocean currents is the fundamental process driving the movement of pelagic larvae in marine systems.

The biological models are less well understood, but are becoming more complex as our understanding of the early-life history of marine species improves. Many biological traits are known to influence dispersal, e.g. pelagic larval duration [CITE] and spawning amount [CITE]. Also more recently, studies have found that larval fish behaviour can also influence their dispersal, e.g. vertical migration (CITE) and orientated horizontal swimming (CITE). The most common approach to BDM is to use individual based models, whereby the model advects particles encapsulating larval traits and behaviours through the hydrodynamic matrix. The biological models are often species-specific, using information gained from empirical studies of the early-life history for that particular species. Although, this is often difficult, due to the lack of available information and often many assumptions must be made in the models [@leis2007b]. Therefore both the identification of the key biological processes influencing connectivity and information on the behaviour of fish larvae are important areas of research.

Hand in hand with the building of models is the need to evaluate their validity at predicting outcomes. Validation must operate at a variety of levels, and focus on individual parameters and model processes (e.g., vertical distributions) to overall outcome (transition matrix). Validation is an iterative process whereby models can be used to make field predictions/hypotheses that are then empirically tested. Following that, models are modified to respond to differences between model predictions and field measurements, and then the cycle is repeated (see Lynch & Davies 1995). As biophysical models become more complex, validation is increasingly complicated (Arhonditsis & Brett 2004). Sensitivity studies using the models themselves can help determine which parameters are most responsive to variation, thereby suggesting where to initially focus validation efforts.

The method involved coupling both

BDM allows us to predict connectivity

-	can measure over spatial scales
-	can test effects of larvae behaviours
-	can larval traits
-	see how patterns change for geographic regions -

Therefore alternative techniques are

Computer modelling techniques allow us to predict connectivity at finer temporal and spatial resolutions than is possible with the empirical methods described above. Our knowledge of oceanographic currents has been considerably advanced through technology such as satellites and ocean drifters. Dispersal by ocean currents has the greatest effect on larval movement thus forming the basis for modelling connectivity. The first connectivity models were based on passive advection of the particles by ocean currents (Bartsch 1988). Advances in knowledge of oceanography and larval behaviour, coupled with advances in technology have seen biophysical models become ever more complex, using multiple hydrodynamic models and larval behaviours.

Given the extensive effort that often must be expended to complete the tracking of a single reproductive event from a single source location, alternative means must be sought to identify realistic dispersal kernels. One alternative approach to estimate dispersal distances, with the po- tential to calculate dispersal kernels, is the utilization of high-resolution biophysical models (e.g., James et al. 2002, Cowen et al. 2006, Aiken et al. 2007). Although considerable qualifications are warranted in the use of models, one obvious advantage over the above indirect and direct methods is that the models allow for multiple releases of virtual larvae. Thus, although each individual run of the model is equivalent to an isolated measurement of a dispersal event, the modeling approach allows repeated measures through time and space, thereby capturing the expected environmental variability and allowing construction of a connectivity matrix (Figure 1). Models are also powerful tools when combined with field/empirical methods (Werner et al. 2007). Besides their utility in resolving spatial scaling patterns, models are also critically important in resolution of the processes contributing to the patterns, and thus are discussed in greater detail below.

these empirical methods

(BIOPHYSICAL MODELLING)

Important of Models
-------------------

-	what can they tell us, e.g. applications of the modelling

What are the issues we face with modelling ?
--------------------------------------------

-	empirical data issues
-	complexity of modelling choices

Thesis outline
--------------

The main objective of this thesis was to investigate the different biological traits of reef fish that influence their dispersal and therefore the connectivity between populations. This question was answered with four specific, but interrelated data chapters. Firstly, I wanted to identify the traits that were being identified as important to include, bother physical and biological, as seen in the published biophysical dispersal modelling studies. Secondly, I wanted to gather empirical data for one of these important biological traits where the was a data gap for fish in the region. Thirdly, using regional hydrodynamics, I wanted to see the effects on reef fish connectivity patterns of different behaviours, different parametrisation of a specific behaviour, and different methods of applying a specific behaviour. Finally, synthesising all this information, I wanted to investigate the connectivity patterns of an endemic and threatened reef fish, and determine the management implications of these potential patterns.

Three decades of research using biophysical dispersal models (BDMs) have provided numerous of examples of major findings and advances in connectivity research [@miller2007; @willis2011; @cowen2009]. As with any cohesive field of research, there is a collective aim to advance our overall understanding of the discipline. For instance, what are typical levels of connectivity that one can expect for different types of system and life histories? Are there generalities to the importance of factors like larval behaviour (swimming ability, sensory ability, cues that initiate settlement) or even aspects of the oceanographic forcing models (time steps, resolution, integration method) that profoundly affect connectivity outcomes. Does a longer pelagic larval duration (PLD) increase the size of the dispersal kernel or can a species limit how far they disperse through vertical migration? The establishment, where possibly, of generalities to these and other issues allows the field to progress. It provides guidance for new studies, allowing them to build on previous ones. This process is critical to the use of biophysical connectivity model outputs in management where there is an expectation that they will be accurate and useful across a broad range of scenarios. The first data chapter is a meta-analysis, evaluating published BDMs, identifying modelling decisions (both physical and biological), with the aim of building upon a previous review by @miller2007. The initial aim of the chapter is to identify trends in the inclusion, and exclusion, of modelling parameters. The goal was to understand if these is a minimum suite of parameters, or default values for parameters that should be included in future BDM studies. More importantly, the final aim of the chapter was to understand the consequences of modelling choices on the resulting connectivity patterns. Common metrics were identified and compared across different parameter choices to understand the effects. These results provide a template for BMDs in the future by highlighting the ramifications of modelling choice, and identifying knowledge gaps in influential parameters choices.

The impetus for the Chapter 3, was the lack of empirical data on the early life history of ichthyoplankton. One of the biggest issues to overcome within the field of connectivity is the dearth of knowledge on many of these influential biological traits. Another issue is that with the information we do know, it is difficult to generalise due to the differences between species, within species and across geographic locations [cite LEIS]. The meta-analysis in Chapter 2 found that vertical migration was a key consideration for connectivity modelling of ichthyoplankton. Therefore, I decided to gather data on the ontogenetic vertical migration patterns of reef fish off the coast of NSW. The sampling consisted of 16 sites off the coast of NSW, catching larval fish at three different depths. Larval fish were identified down to family level, and I chose seven reef associated families with the largest sample sizes. Larval fish were identified to ontogenetic stage, using the development of the caudal fin as a marker. While there have been many larval fish assemblage studies off the NSW coast [cite], no study had specifically looked at ontogenetic vertical distribution patterns. The study also considered the effect of oceanographic features on this pattern, to see if the ontogenetic distribution changed when larval fish were in coastal waters entrained by the East Australia Current, or entrained inside a mesoscale eddy.

[Created the model]. Chapter 4 was a theoretical modelling study, testing the effect of different behaviours: passive, vertical advection (VA), diel vertical migration (DVM), ontogenetic vertical migration (OVM), and orientated horizontal swimming (OHS), on the connectivity patterns from a BDM of the New South Wales region. **Talk about effect on modelling** Understanding important behaviours to model in the region allow us know which behaviours to implement, and where to focus empirical research. The second aim of this chapter was to gain an understanding of the sensitivity of an behaviour to different values, and different methods. Insight into how connectivity patterns are affected by parameter choice helps us understand the impacts our assumptions when empirical knowledge of a behaviour for a particular species is not available in from the literature.

The final chapter synthesised the results of each of the previous data chapters to investigate the connectivity, using a BDM, of the black cod (*Epinephelus daemelii*), a threatened reef fish endemic to NSW. The model used the important behavioural traits for dispersal models identified in Chapters 2 and 4, and populated the OVM behaviour for *E. daemelii* using data collected for Serranidae in Chapter 3. The connectivity across the known distribution was measured over the years 2004-2011. Comparisons were made with the connectivity patterns seen with larvae spawned across the known distribution, and larvae spawned from only regions with known populations. Finally, the last aim was to compare these connectivity patterns to the current network of marine protected areas, both under state and federal jurisdiction, and to identify if there are areas not currently protected that might assist *E. daemelii* in population recovery.

Fill in some

. This information will serve to guide the application of BDMs into the future and by highlighting the ramifications of the inclusion/exclusion of key biological parameters. It will also identify gaps in our implementation of these parameters which should serve to identify necessary empirical work needed to address t

In Chapter 2, I therefore reviewed the current literature using DNA-based methods for the assessment of predator diets and applications of this method for exploring trophic interactions. This review provides a valuable semi-quantitative synthesis of the uses, strengths and future research needs of DNA-based diet analysis across a broad range of predators and ecosystems. The review highlights DNA-based methods as the most taxonomically sensitive method available and effective for obtaining detailed information on ecological interactions in a complex food web, and I therefore apply DNA-based techniques to my study system.

The aim of Chapter 2 and 3 of this thesis was to determine whether the existing native Sydney rock oyster S. glomerata was under stress from the development of artificial habitats in an urbanised estuary and the presence of the invasive Pacific oyster (C. gigas). It was predicted that current human disturbances in the form of coastal development will affect the abundance, size, distribution and health of estuarine oysters, and increase the abundance of invasive oysters.

The first aim was to investgate

The influence of modelling choices, both physical and biological parameters, were measured using common metrics of connectivity.

In this study, we review the recent literature using BDMs to evaluate the ability of this collective body of work to provide insight into the ramifications of the choices we make when attempting to include complexity and realism in our models. We achieve this aim by firstly evaluating if the field is progressing in its inclusion of biological parameters. We look at the collection of parameters included in BDMs, how this is changing over time, and if there are trends in how parameters are included (or excluded) based on the context of models. We define a model as a distinct collection of parameters for a BDM, and a study as a published collection of one or more models. Secondly, and most importantly, we look at the consequences of including different parameters on model results. Here we assess if there are observable differences in key metrics of connectivity as a result of the inclusion of specific biological parameters. We also assess the degree to which the physical context of the models regulate any observed effect of biological parameters. This information will serve to guide the application of BDMs into the future and by highlighting the ramifications of the inclusion/exclusion of key biological parameters. It will also identify gaps in our implementation of these parameters which should serve to identify necessary empirical work needed to address these shortcomings.

ing potential connectivity patterns, as empirical studies using current methods are inherently difficult over extended spatial and temporal scales. For BDMs to become mature research tools, we need to know understand what are the important parameters in predicting connectivity patterns - what traits should modellers focus on. Producing accurate models, leading to better understanding of the connectivity between marine populations has important conservation implications in the design of marine protected areas. This project models these connectivity patterns using a biophysical model and specifically focuses on the traits of pelagic larvae of reef fish that influence connectivity and how these patterns can be used as a conservation tool. The project has four logical sections that each flow on from each other, firstly a meta-analysis to see what parameters BDMs were implementing and how they were affecting the estimated connectivity, secondly an empirical chapter to gather data with which to parametrise an important biological trait, thirdly a theoretical modelling chapter to see how different biological trait

The overarching aim of this thesis was to develop and implement an investigative framework aimed at identifying trophic effects resulting from the recovery of two important coastal predators, Australian and long-nosed fur seals, on complex, temperate ecosystems in southeastern Australia (Error! Reference source not found.). What do these predators eat in a relatively novel environment? Does the return of fur seals to coastal ecosystems of southeastern Australia hail direct (consumptive) and indirect (non-consumptive) effects cascading from prey species down to the lowest trophic levels in complex marine ecosystems? I therefore embarked on a project to determine whether the recolonisation of important coastal predators, fur seals, mattered or not to the reef ecosystems of southeastern Australian. Overall, I hypothesised that the recovery of fur seals in eastern Australia would result in: (1) important consumptive interactions linking fur seals to temperate reefs, which would (2) lead to prey limitation, and subsequently (3) release secondary consumers from pressure by mesopredators, thereby (4) increasing herbivory on temperate reefs (Error! Reference source not found.).

The overarching objective of this thesis was to translate insights size spectra have offered into the structure and function of other marine ecosystems to temperate and tropical reefs. Specifically, I sought to explore the insights that size spectra analyses could give into how size- based processes shape reef fish communities, and into ecosystem baselines.

CHAPTER 2: Meta-analysis: what was I trying to achieve
------------------------------------------------------

-	Find out what parameters were important ? How did parameter choice effect modelling choice ? -

CHAPTER 3: empirical
--------------------

-	getting local data for fish species

CHAPTER 4: theoretical
----------------------

-	what are some important features?

CHAPTER 5: black cod
--------------------

-	using connectivity ,can we see if the networks are effective?
