# Title

Modelling reef fish connectivity: investigating the biological mechanisms that influence connectivity patterns.

# Abstract

Connectivity in marine systems refers to spatially distinct populations connected through exchange of individuals. For many marine populations, this population connectivity occurs during the pelagic larval phase of a species, whereby prevailing currents are able to transport larvae considerable distances to settle amongst new populations. Increasingly we have seen that the species-specific biology of these larvae can also influence where they settle, using traits such as vertical migration or olfactory senses. Biophysical dispersal modelling (BDM) — a hydrodynamic model coupled with a biological model — lend themselves to inferring potential connectivity patterns, as empirical studies using current methods are inherently difficult over extended spatial and temporal scales. For BDMs to become mature research tools, we need to know understand what are the important parameters in predicting connectivity patterns - what traits should modellers focus on. Producing accurate models, leading to better understanding of the connectivity between marine populations has important conservation implications in the design of marine protected areas. This project models these connectivity patterns using a biophysical model and specifically focuses on the traits of pelagic larvae of reef fish that influence connectivity and how these patterns can be used as a conservation tool. The project has four logical sections that each flow on from each other, firstly a meta-analysis to see what parameters BDMs were implementing and how they were affecting the estimated connectivity, secondly an empirical chapter to gather data with which to parametrise an important biological trait, thirdly a theoretical modelling chapter to see how different biological traits affect connectivity patterns off the NSW coast, and finally an applied chapter to determine the effectiveness of current marine protected areas, Commonwealth and state in protecting a threatened reef fish species. The meta-analysis was undertaken, with two distinct aims, to investigate the current state of the field, and to determine how the choice of parameters in connectivity models affect the resulting connectivity patterns. Four common metrics (local retention, self-recruitment, settlement success and dispersal distance) were used for comparison of different parameters to see if certain traits were influential. A lack of common metrics made analyses difficult, yet it provided evidence that these models are complex, and as such single parameters themselves do not have an underlying influence. The results of this meta-analysis provide a useful framework on parameters choice for future consideration of connectivity studies. The empirical chapter, in turn, focused on two identified outputs of ontogenetic stage and length, and used these to predict the depth of larvae in the water column, for seven common temperate reef associated families. Ichthyoplankton were collected off the NSW coast at three different depths (0-5m, 5-50m, 50-100m) and assessed for ontogenetic stage (pre-flexion, flexion or post-flexion) and measured for total length (mm). Vertical migration patterns were found to different between each family. The theoretical chapter modelled the effects of known swimming behaviours of larval fish on connectivity, specifically ontogenetic vertical migration, diel vertical migration, and orientated swimming. Comparing the influence of known swimming behaviour on connectivity allows us to better determine the focus of efforts when collecting empirical data and implementing these behaviours in connectivity modelling studies. It also compared both different parameters and implementations of ontogenetic vertical migration to determine the influence on connectivity patterns. The applied chapter used these biophysical models to identify potential connectivity patterns of the threatened black cod (*Epinephelus daemelii*), and sought to determine if the Commonwealth marine parks (specifically the Temperate East Commonwealth Marine Reserves Network) fulfil the goal of protecting this vulnerable species or if important connectivity to larval settling areas are not captured within the current framework.
