General discussion
=================

The overarching aim of this thesis was to contribute to the understanding of the biological traits and behaviours that influence the dispersal and connectivity patterns of ichthyoplankton. I have been able to give new insights into the connectivity of ichthyoplankton using a combination of meta-analysis of recent biophysical dispersal model (BDM) studies, an empirical study on the ontogenetic vertical distribution of ichthyoplankton, a theoretical modelling study investigating the influence of ichthyoplankton behaviours on connectivity, and finally predicting the connectivity of the reef fish *Epinephelus daemelii* and evaluating the potential effectiveness of marine reserves. The results of this thesis have implications for both the considerations of future BDM studies and the conservation and management of *E. daemelii*. This discussion chapter integrates the key findings of this thesis, providing summations of each data chapter and addressing similarities, differences, and implications for the field. In addition, the limitations of BDM studies are addressed, and directions and recommendations for future research are explored.

## Summary of key findings

Biophysical dispersal models are a useful tool to measure ichthyoplankton connectivity in the absence of readily obtained empirical results, however, these models are not without complexity. BDMs are becoming more prevalent and sophisticated as computing power increases and at the same time becomes more economical [@mumby2017]. The complexity of BDMs arises from coupling physical and biological models together, creating an influx of modelling parameters and choices — each with consequences for the BDMs degree of uncertainty. To minimise this uncertainty, one approach is to use applicable model choices (i.e. generalities) from prior BDM studies in the literature. Therefore, to understand the trends of parameter choices (and their influence on connectivity), in Chapter 2 I undertook a meta-analysis of BDM connectivity studies. The meta-analysis used studies published from 2009 onwards, the publication year of the ICES manual detailing a standard approach for BDMs studies [@north2009]. The first aim of the chapter was to identify the trends of parameters included in BDMs for both the physical and biological models. The physical models are becoming more complex, using hydrodynamic models with increasing spatial resolution and nesting regional hydrodynamic models to capture spatial oceanography accurately, e.g. different hydrodynamic models capturing either near-shore or off-shore processes. Similar to the physical models, biological models are increasing in complexity with researchers encapsulating more behaviour in models over time, most likely correlated with increased knowledge of ichthyoplankton life history. However, there was still a strong tendency to use passive transport models — a surprising result given that it has been known for over a decade that reef fish larvae can influence their dispersal through vertical migration [@paris2004; @werner1993], or through sensory abilities [@gerlach2007a], and it is generally accepted that reef fish become nektonic before they settle [@leis2006].

The second aim of the meta-analysis examined the influence of these parameters on commonly identified metrics (self-recruitment, local retention, settlement success, and dispersal distance) of connectivity amongst the studies. Considerable variation was seen amongst the reported values for each of the metrics. This result highlights the differences in connectivity patterns both across regions and the effect parameter choice has on input parameters. The extensive suite of input parameters reduced the ability to perform analysis across all combinations. Moreover, transparent reporting of all included parameters and subsequent values did not always occur and there was no consensus on connectivity metrics. Comparisons between studies are inherently difficult because of the differences in models choices based on principles such as study regions, species, or available knowledge. Despite these difficulties, I was able to derive several patterns regarding the influence of model choices on connectivity metrics. Firstly, in an open oceanic system the dispersal distance of ichthyoplankton was longer and there was a decrease in local retention. The hydrodynamic model resolution did not affect the metrics of connectivity, but using nested hydrodynamic models did result in less self-recruitment. Of the biological parameters investigated, the length of both the pelagic larval duration (PLD) and settlement competency window had no influence on the metrics. Including larval mortality in a BDM did not impact the settlement success to the extent expected. Settlement success was increased by the inclusion of any behaviour, while specifically orientated horizontal swimming (OHS) decreased self-recruitment. To progress this field further, there is a need to decide upon common metrics that allow meaningful comparisons between models, which is addressed below. This review provides researchers with more context on what parameters are important to include in future BDM studies.

As mentioned within this thesis, a major challenge of using BDMs to predict connectivity is the scarcity of species-specific fish early-life history information. Modellers are often compelled to introduce assumptions in parameter choice for larval behaviours, i.e. by using values of conspecifics, congeners [see methods in Chapter 5; @young2012], or general values [see methods in Chapter 5; @corell2012]. If there is no information for a particular parameter choice, another option for modellers to limit uncertainty is to exclude specific behaviours from the BDM, even if the behaviour is known to strongly influence connectivity [@andrello2013]. Therefore, connectivity modelling requires the modeller to consider the inclusion of realistic biological processes against limiting the assumptions needed to parameterise these processes. Reducing these modelling assumptions is primarily addressed by collecting more data on ichthyoplankton .

Ontogenetic vertical migration (OVM) is a behaviour of ichthyoplankton known to influence dispersal by exposing larvae to currents with variable strengths and directions across the water column [@cowen2009]. To date, OVM has not been explicitly studied for reef-associated ichthyoplankton of NSW. To address this knowledge gap and with the goal of using the data to parameterise a BDM, Chapter 3 measured the OVM distribution of seven reef-associated taxonomic families of fish off the coast of NSW. The ontogenetic stage (preflexion, flexion, and postflexion) and standard length of the larval fish were measured at three different depth bins; 0-5 m, 5-50 m, and 50-100 m. In addition, I also investigated any differences in these patterns between water masses, i.e. coastal or eddy waters. The experimental methodology, a common technique [@barnett1984; @paris2004; @irisson2010], does not explicitly capture OVM behaviour, but it does give a robust estimate of where the centre of mass is for each ichthyoplankton ontogenetic stage. Visual observation of OVM behaviour of larval fish in nature is limited to small spatial (e.g. upper 20m of water column) and temporal scales (e.g. minutes to hours), requiring other methods to assess vertical distribution [@leis2010].

In general, the ichthyoplankton were found to migrate deeper with ontogeny and length. This pattern has been seen in other studies looking at the vertical distribution of reef fish [@irisson2010; @huebert2011]. Mullidae was the exception to this pattern, migrating upwards towards the surface waters with ontogeny, corresponding to where postflexion Mullidae larvae have been found off NSW [@gray1993]. The type of water mass did not affect the vertical distribution of the ichthyoplankton, suggesting that other factors determine vertical migration behaviour. As expected, entrainment within an eddy produce in general older and longer larvae [@shulzitski2016].

Vertical distribution patterns of ichthyoplankton are known to be highly variable both within and between species. Therefore, often results are contrasting, e.g. in Chapter 3 I found a strong ontogenetic shift downwards for Scorpaenidae, yet other studies have found Scorpaenidae had either no ontogenetic movement [@huebert2011] or postflexion larvae at the surface [@kuwahara1983]. The discrepancies seen could be differences between species within a taxonomic grouping, as studies often group ichthyoplankton into taxonomic families (as seen in Chapter 3) due to the expert level knowledge required to use morphological diagnostics to identify larval fish to species. Species identification of ichthyoplankton is predicted to become less of an issue as genetic techniques such as DNA barcoding for larval fish mature and become cheaper for researchers to access [@hubert2015]. Differences in species at geographic locations can also drive the variation in results, ichthyoplankton are known to behave differently in tropical or temperate environments, i.e. latitudinal differences [@figueira2009a; @leis2013]. Inherent differences between species across geographic locations are one concern, but there is also the difficulty of ensuring equal sampling efforts across ontogenetic stages and depths due to net avoidance of postflexion fish [@leis2006], high mortality rates [@houde1989], and general patchiness in distributions [@gray1993; @cowen1993]. Deriving general patterns for OVM for ichthyoplankton might therefore be impossible, with comparisons focused on studies with similar latitudes.

With the knowledge that behaviours of ichthyoplankton affect dispersal and connectivity patterns [@leis2007], the endeavour of Chapter 4 was to investigate the relative influence of behaviours on connectivity using a BDM. The aim was achieved twofold, through examining the effect of combinations of different ichthyoplankton behaviours, and by changing both the parameter values and implementation methodology of a specific behaviour. The ichthyoplankton behaviours were parameterised using a combination of values derived from the literature and the OVM results obtained in Chapter 3. The behaviours used in this chapter chosen were: OVM [@paris2004], DVM [diel vertical migration; @aiken2011], and OHS [@staaterman2012]. Including behaviour in a model increased local retention and reduced the dispersal distance, confirming similar results in other studies [@shanks2009; @paris2007]. Although, this pattern is not universal amongst studies, sometimes the opposite effect is seen, e.g. including behaviour can increase dispersal [@ospina-alvarez2012]. There was a strong influence of ichthyoplankton behaviour found on connectivity patterns, however, the choice of location and timing of larval release had a stronger effect, due to the geographical differences in oceanography.

Amongst the different behaviours considered, the most influential on connectivity was OHS the least was OVM. Other studies have found similar results for the strong effect of OHS, with the behaviour reducing dispersal distance and increasing local retention [@wolanski2014; @staaterman2012]. Despite this influence, for the reviewed studies in Chapter 2 only a small number included OHS.
[EDITED UP TO]
The reason for a limited number of studies applying OHS could be it was not thought to be as influential as seen in Chapter 4, or empirical data to parameterise the behaviour was unknown for particular study species. Orientation behaviour is a relatively new field of interest and not yet fully understood, yet these results suggest including OHS behaviour in future connectivity studies of ichthyoplankton should be a priority, especially in similar coastal regions with near-shore boundary currents. It emphasises the importance of building upon the empirical research into the sensory abilities of larval fish (e.g. hearing, vision, and chemosensation) and how they discern habitat cues using these senses [@faillettaz2015; @berenshtein2014; @leis2014]. Swimming speeds, however, are one of the more well-studied facets of ichthyoplankton early-life history [@fisher2000; @hogan2007; @leis1997; @stobutzki1997], allowing for fewer assumptions in model parameterisation. The connectivity patterns derived using larvae with OVM only exhibited a small sensitivity to different vertical distribution patterns seen in Chapter 3. The sensitivity of dispersal patterns was higher when the ontogenetic distribution was kept constant, but the timing of movement for individual larva between depths was altered. This result leads to the conclusion that it is more important to accurately model the processes of a specific behaviour than get the parameter values precise. It also infers that for behaviours, at least OVM behaviours, using assumptions to parametrise the behaviour have less influence than not including the behaviour at all. These results accentuate the importance of sensitivity analyses in BDM studies and how researchers should aspire to publish or make the results of sensitivity analyses available [@simons2013].

The final chapter of this thesis (Chapter 5) took an applied BDM approach, building upon the results of each of the previous data chapters. The primary aim was to predict the larval connectivity patterns of the black cod [*E. daemelii*; @francis2016], a protected species of NSW. The BDM included the ichthyoplankton behaviours OHS and OVM due to the results in Chapter 4. The OVM behaviour was parameterised using the vertical distribution results obtained in Chapter 3 for Serranidae in NSW. *E. daemelii* larvae were released over the period 2004-2011 across its entire known distribution in NSW, the whole coastline and the offshore islands, Elizabeth and Middleton Reefs and Lord Howe Island. The larval dispersal of *E. daemelii* was assessed to determine the connectivity of regions with the distribution, specifically the regions of strong source and settlement, i.e. consistently high over the entire release period. Despite being protected since 1983 due to sharp population decline [@francis2016], *E. daemelii* has not been seen to increase in numbers. One potential cause for seeing no change in population size is the current marine reserve network (i.e. MPA) in NSW is not structured to benefit *E. daemelii*. Therefore, utilising the modelled connectivity patterns, the second aim was to compare these results, from both across the entire distribution and considering only known regions of aggregation, to ascertain if there are gaps within the existing marine protected network and if so, what regions should be prioritised for protection.

Despite the near-shore boundary current along the NSW coastline, e.g. the Eastern Australian Current (EAC), I found the strongest connectivity of *E. daemelii* larvae occurred either within the natal region or amongst the regions of nearest latitude. There was dispersal between most regions across the known distribution, providing the potential of genetic connectivity, with dispersal tailing in a polewards direction (i.e. the direction of the EAC). Weak connectivity was seen between the NSW coastline and the off-shore islands, connectivity that has previously been hypothesised to occur [@appleyard2007]. Four subpopulations were identified from the results using graph theory; a northern, central, southern population along the NSW coastline, and an off-shore reef population. There was robust demographic connectivity within these populations, but importantly also some connectivity between all these populations. When comparing this potential connectivity with current marine protected areas, it was found regions with high connectivity with known aggregations either had moderate sanctuary zone (i.e. no-take area) protection or none at all. Considering the entire distribution, many of the strongest sites of connectivity also had no marine protection at all. Therefore, it suggests that while the current marine protected areas do contain the patches of known aggregation, there are regions with strong settlement where increased protection could yield conservation benefits, e.g. Yamba. There was also strong settlement to the regions of Newcastle and Sydney, two regions that have limited protection for both settlement and spawning sites (although a marine reserve in the Hawkesbury area is under consideration).

The results from Chapter 5 reveal the intricacies in designing marine protected areas and how the desire to protect the maximum amount of species (e.g. increasing biodiversity) does not necessarily provide a benefit all targeted species. Marine reserves need to be constantly evaluated to ensure they are meeting their required protection goals [@watson2016]. There are several factors that drive marine network design including the amount of fishing pressure species are under [both recreational and commercial @botsford2009], how contiguous the network of reserves needs to be using species connectivity patterns [@botsford2001], and deciding the size of the protected area relative to the migration of adult species [@green2015]. Ideally, marine reserves should be areas of high local retention [@botsford2009] and contain enough quality habitat for species to maximise carrying capacity [@cabral2016]. One approach is to identify critical subpopulations within a metapopulation to protect [@watson2011]. The difficulty arises when species have different traits, e.g. connectivity patterns, adult movements, and habitat requirements. To deal with this issue, a triage approach can be taken, either prioritising the assets [e.g. species or habitat; @bottrill2008] or ecosystem services [@pendleton2015] to protect. Conservation triage is not without controversy as it raises many ethical questions about accepting which species will go extinct [@wilson2016], however, the threat of climate change is creating an atmosphere where researchers are more willing to take interventionist approaches [@hagerman2014]. Connectivity itself is a dynamic process, changes in oceanography and biology affect larval dispersal, demonstrated by the inter-annual variability seen in Chapter 5. Some adult populations are highly mobile [@welsh2014], which could produce variation between spawning locations. Therefore designing MPAs using patterns of larval connectivity is not a trivial task [@cudney-bueno2009]. dispersal profiles seen in one year might not occur the following year. For example, the effects of a southward moving EAC [@ridgway2007] on the modelled black cod connectivity patterns in Chapter 5 is unknown. Changing currents is not limited to Australia either, with other major oceanic systems showing a weakening of boundary currents [@thornalley2018]. However, management complexity can be reduced by managing for larval connectivity, especially if the self-recruitment and local retention of a species are high [@bode2016a].

To address this variability, moving away from single species protection by using dynamic protected areas or a whole of ecosystem approach have been proposed [@soria2014]. Dynamic protection attempts to deal with the fundamental variability and openness of marine systems, an environment that is distinct to terrestrial systems and therefore requires different approaches [@carr2003]. Dynamic protected areas provide benefits, not just to species undergoing range-shifts but provide an evener distribution of biomass to improve the resilience of species to a changing environment [@game2009]. A dynamic approach to protection has been implemented to some degree in Australia in oceanic areas to reduce fishing pressure on pelagic species [@smith2007; @melbourne-thomas2017]. Another solution is to consider a metacommunity approach [@leibold2004] for protection, designing MPAs using the connectivity patterns modelled from general larval traits or using multiple species across taxonomic groups [e.g. coral, crabs, and fish; @treml2012a; @melia2016]. Managing metacommunity dynamics is a complex system [i.e. changes in primary productivity can drive variation in community dynamics @fernandez2016] and novel techniques are still being developed to measure these dynamics to benefit marine spatial planning [@grainger2016; @melia2016]. This complexity suggests a community-wide range-shift due to changing conditions is unlikely, most likely species within a community will exhibit different responses, complicating future conservation management [@yletyinen2016].

Before these approaches can be utilised in NSW, more knowledge of the population biology and connectivity of key targeted species (including *E. daemelii*) is required [@curley2013]. Australia is in an enviable position to enact meaningful conservation due to the ability to legislate protection over the entire range of populations due to our isolated geography. The only impediment is different jurisdictions between states and the Commonwealth. In this study, I only looked at New South Wales and the offshore islands, but the edges of *E. daemelii* distribution range occur in Queensland and Victoria. Therefore it is vital that multilateral mechanisms within Government exist [e.g. @anzecctaskforceonmarineprotectedareas1999], providing a framework and tools for enacting conservation strategies that act over species distributions and potential range-shifts, and not dictated by arbitrary state and federal boundaries.

## Limitations to biophysical dispersal modelling for measuring connectivity

Hydrodynamic models will always contain a degree of error and uncertainty in their predictions [@fossette2012] and the size of the error in measurements is not consistent between models [@nolasco2018]. This thesis used off-line hydrodynamic models, which allow for faster computation than in-line (running physical and biological models simultaneously). However, using off-line hydrodynamic models decreases the model resolution (e.g. increases the model time step), and uses interpolation to estimate some of these processes that occur on shorter time-scales. The hydrodynamic model used in this thesis had a 24-hour time step and therefore short-lived dynamic processes (e.g. tidal movements) are not captured as well in the model. Chapter 2 suggested that model resolution did not effect connectivity metrics, however, it is likely this depends on the regional coastal dynamics, e.g. the strong settlement effects of small-scale sticky reef dynamics are not captured on the scale of many hydrodynamic models [@golbuu2012]. The ability of models to accurately predict current velocities over small spatial scales is a limitation of all BDM models. In turn, the resolution and accuracy of the settlement habitat can be another limitation of the physical model within a BDM.

As mentioned above, assumptions of modelling choices made during the design of BDM studies is the most significant limitation. Decisions are required on the biological traits and behaviours to include and the values to parametrise them with, due to the lack of empirical information on many species. For example, in Chapter 5, with unknown specific *E. daemelii* parameters, I assumed using a similar species for the development time of the larvae and averaged family data for swimming abilities were both representative of *E. daemelii*. This approach is not unreasonable, but it must be acknowledged it is an assumption nonetheless. The requirement to use assumptions is not specific to this study and occurs in the majority of BDM studies, especially when considering species that do not live on coral reefs or are targeted for fishing. Mortality rates of larval fish are a prime example of an almost universal assumption included in BDM studies, as for many species the exact rate of larval mortality is estimated from indirect sources [@johnson2015]. Another assumption involved in this thesis was the size of the settlement sensory distance, giving the larvae the ability to sense, orientate, and swim towards suitable habitat within a 7 km boundary. The likelihood of *E. daemelii* larvae being able to sense habitat is why I chose to make these assumptions [@leis2010], however, the distance and ability are not explicitly known. From Chapter 4, it has been shown this ability for larval fish to orientate significantly changes dispersal patterns, and it was used in Chapter 5 as well. Potentially if this assumption turns out to be incorrect, the integrity of the results in Chapter 5 may well need to be considered. As such, future research needs to concentrate on understanding this early-life history of ichthyoplankton, and many novel techniques are being designed to achieve this goal [@paris2013; @mouritsen2013; @berenshtein2014]. In the short-term, accepting the fact parameterisation assumptions will be required, understanding the consequences of these assumptions is critical. Understanding the effects of modelling assumptions is especially important for influential dispersal changing behaviours, namely OHS and vertical migration. In Chapter 4, I tried to address this by testing for the effect of both parameter choice (different distributions throughout ontogeny for vertical migration) and the effects of different implementations of modelling behaviour (changing the distribution with ontogeny, daily, or with the time step).

## Model validation

The predominant question for a modelling study concerns the veracity of the model and thus the level of confidence in interpreting and using the results. Its a limitation of this thesis that the BDM used in Chapters 4 and 5 have not been validated against empirical data. Validating the results of BDMs is increasingly achievable using empirical methods and an essential next step [@burgess2014]. Model validation for BDM studies commonly use a multi-methodological approach, using genetic [@feutry2013; @sunday2014; @coscia2012; @munguia-vega2014; @crandall2012; @galindo2010] or elemental markers [i.e. otolith chemistry, @crochelet2013] to compare the derived connectivity patterns against observed distributions. These multi-methodological approaches do provide increased confidence in the predicted larval dispersal but do not (and for practical reasons, cannot) capture temporal and spatial variability. Comparisons with empirical studies that also contain levels of uncertainty  reduced the power of a direct comparison unless accounted for, e.g. through the use of confidence intervals on the results [@nolasco2018]. Model validation using recruitment data has only been performed in a handful of connectivity BDM studies, though when it has been used it showed the modelled patterns were realistic, e.g. measuring recruitment with light traps explained 70% of the temporal variation predicted by a BDM [@sponaugle2012]. For rare species, such as *E. daemelii* modelled in Chapter 5, validation using recruitment data is difficult, a priori model validation with known recruitment data for another species is an alternative approach. Confidence in the results of this thesis stems from the validation of the hydrodynamic model used [@oke2013], which provides accurate current velocities for the model domain compared to other models [@vasile2018; @chiswell2014]. In addition, the development of the biological model used a rigorous methodology that included comprehensive unit and sensitivity testing, along with a paradigm of code reuse from mature open source software where available.

## Reproducibility and transparency

A trait common to nearly all biophysical connectivity studies is that they are attempting to estimate at least one of two fundamental and general patterns; 1) levels of connectivity between natal and settlement sites and 2) dispersal of larvae in the system. The first is mostly a measure of larval source-sink dynamics, looking at patterns of production and settlement in marine species with a pelagic larval phase that inherently links one patch in the system to another. The second is a measure of the total dispersal area, looking at issues such as how far larvae disperse and where they occur in highest densities in the system. Both traits are useful in describing system connectivity and dispersal and are a product of the system and modelling environment. In undertaking the review in Chapter 2, I came across two impediments to a meta-analysis of these estimated metrics. Firstly, many studies utilised unique metrics to measure either of these patterns. In fact, I found over 25 different measures used to describe the patterns of connectivity & dispersal Secondly, for a given metric, often only a single summary statistic was reported, e.g. mean, median, or upper quartile. Summary statistics are useful, however, they were frequently reported without information on the underlying dispersal distribution, making rigorous qualitative comparisons difficult.

Reproducibility, a term often synonymous with open science, is an important facet in assessing the scientific merit of a published paper [@opensciencecollaboration2015]. It can be difficult to achieve in ecological studies due to the inherent variability in nature [@schnitzer2016]. However, the same challenges do not exist in computational modelling [@peng2011]. Ideally, for reproducibility the model configurations, source code, and the output data are made available along with the publication. Transparency provides confidence to the reader and importantly the peer reviewer in the outcomes and interpretations of the study [@sudhof2016]. Utilising common frameworks for designing, coding, and testing BDMs [e.g. TRACE; @grimm2014] and automating workflows [@wilson2014] are important steps to produce realistic and reliable models.

@sandve2013 produced ten rules of reproducibility for computational research, which all apply to studies involving a biophysical model. Most are intuitive, for example, tracking precisely how results were obtained, automating as many steps as possible, and using version control for scripts, code, and software. Others are not thought about as often, such as documenting the seed used for random number generators, which was not seen amongst the connectivity studies in Chapter 2. The most visible facet to a researcher reading a published study is Rule 10 of @sandve2013: "all input data, scripts, versions, parameters, and intermediate results should be made publicly and easily accessible". Ignoring the reporting of the random number seed and providing access to source code, only 34% of the studies in our review could be considered reproducible from the information made public.

Transparency is difficult to obtain for complex modelling studies, due to a large number of parameters and modelling choices involved. In my review, many common and rectifiable omissions prevented reproducibility, deduced while inspecting the methods and the supporting information (if available). 12% of the studies did not indicate the years used for their oceanographic model in their simulation. 34% did not mention the time step used when advecting the larvae in their model. 69% cited using diffusion in their model, but only 51% of these published the diffusion coefficient used. When mortality was implemented into the biophysical model, 25% of these studies did not include the mortality curve or rate used. It is advised, where possible, to use oceanographic models that are freely available to the public (although preference should be towards the most accurate model). Fortunately, this is happening more, whether it is government funded ocean models becoming available through legislative requirements or studies using open hydrodynamics models such as the Regional Ocean Modelling System (ROMS) or the Princeton Ocean Model (POM), which can be coupled with higher resolution models for specific site locations. Transparency amongst models (providing source code) allows for other researchers without the necessary coding skills to utilise the system. There are several examples BDMs already following an open source paradigm [e.g. Ichthyop @lett2008; CMS @paris2013; MGET @roberts2010], suggesting widespread support for model reuse amongst the community.

Complexity in biophysical models derives from coupling two distinct models, biological and physical, creating an additive effect on the number of input parameters. However, it is impossible to reproduce a biophysical connectivity study without all of these parameters, hence the importance of publishing these parameters along with the results. The strong trend towards supplementary information [@kenyon2014; @pop2015] in journals allow for publication of these parameters without obscuring the primary scientific message. The cost of reproducible research for biophysical studies is minimal, many free online repositories exist for both source code and data, two popular examples being GitHub (http://github.com - used for this thesis) and Dryad (http://datadryad.org). Only two studies in the review uploaded their data using such a portal, both choosing to use Dryad. Several journals are also making reproducibility a requirement and providing mechanisms for online storage of data (e.g. PLOS Biology).

### A common approach

To provide transparency and allow for useful comparisons between connectivity studies using biophysical models, a common approach to publishing both methods and results is required. Two main problems with connectivity studies were identified that prevented meaningful comparisons. The first is a lack of commonality to the metrics used to describe the connectivity amongst studies. The second issue is the lack of reproducibility and clarity of the model parameters used in studies.

The suggested approach to get consistency amongst metrics is to utilise the two most common metrics currently reported. These provide useful measures and also they should be readily accepted amongst the research community (@tbl:metrics). The first metric, a connectivity matrix (also referred to as a transition matrix), is the most useful for connectivity studies. The connectivity measures of self-recruitment, local retention and settlement success can all be calculated from the underlying matrix data (means of these values are also useful in publication for easy reference). Therefore, in addition to presenting the data in a heat map visualisation, the full connectivity matrix should be published. It is suggested these are published in an online data-repository or attached as supplementary information, rather than in the body of the paper. Publishing this data is especially important where studies may have simulated many connectivity matrices for different situations (e.g. time periods, parameter combinations). The supplied matrices can be data summaries, e.g. providing the mean connectivity matrix (with estimates of variation) for a study conducted over a five year period. It is understood reporting of connectivity matrices can become non-trivial depending on the number of sites used in the model and the number of days larvae are spawned. There is no one solution, instead options ranging from complete data dumps to summarising results into more management segments (e.g. years) or only providing data relating to the important findings of the paper. However, where a parameter such as PLD is varied, different matrices should be supplied for each value used for such results to be more broadly useful to the field in the future. Graph theory is also a useful technique to assess the connectivity of a system [@treml2008]. There are easily derived and comparable metrics, however, it can be hard to calculate the underlying values of the connectivity matrix, which makes it hard to compare against studies that do not also use a graph theory approach. So even where graph theory has been utilised, publishing the fundamental connectivity matrix is still essential.

: The two metrics that are required to make a comparative analysis of studies using biophysical connectivity models. From each of these metrics, four important measures can be derived for further analysis {#tbl:metrics}

| Published metric    | Derivable measure parameters  |
|:--------------------|:------------------------------|
| Connectivity matrix | Site-site connectivity values |
|                     | Self-recruitment              |
|                     | Local retention               |
|                     | Dispersal success             |
| Dispersal kernel    | Mean distance travelled       |
|                     | Median distance travelled     |
|                     | Maximum distance travelled    |
|                     | Measure of spread             |

The second most important metric used to describe the output of these models is the dispersal kernel. The dispersal kernel——a probability density function——gives information about the spread and distance of dispersed larvae in the system. For the dispersal kernel, publishing the density plot and a heat map is the recommendation. From a density plot, the mean, median and maximum distance travelled can be derived to allow for comparisons between studies, along with the distribution of the dispersal kernel. Note that distance refers to the actual distance travelled, therefore when other distances such as straight-line or alongshore distances are used it is important to define this. There is no consensus for a measure used for spread. A few of studies in our review used a measure called positive or seeded area, which counted all the cells in the system that had greater than one particle to get a measure of the spread. Another two studies tried to calculate the centre of the mass of larvae to see how it changed over time. The positive area measure holds potential though it would need to be standardised to the size of the cells used in the model.

To provide transparency between studies on how the biophysical model is implemented, a non-exhaustive list of the sort of parameters required to reproduce these studies is provided (@tbl:open). The list covers parameters used for both the physical and biological models. This list is not definitive as models will increasingly become more complex and there will be more parameters added to the initialisation of the models. For reproducibility purposes, an individual set of parameter values should be supplied for every model run used in the study. Again, these can be supplied in the supporting information or online in a data repository.

: List of input parameters to a biophysical model that should be published as part of every connectivity study using a biophysical model. All values should be published in the appropriate SI units where applicable. The supplied column list the percentage of studies that included this information at the time of publication {#tbl:open}

| Model      | Name                    | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |  |
|:-----------|:------------------------|:--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:-|
| Particle   | Particle model          | Link to the source code of the particle model used and specifications with information on the type, movement and integration methods e.g. Individual based model, with Lagrangian model and using Runge-Kutta fourth order method for integration |  |
|            | Random number seed      | If random numbers are used, it is important to publish the seed used to generate the random number so the study can be replicated [@sandve2013]                                                                                                   |  |
| Physical   | Oceanographic model     | Link to the specifications of the model, including all sub-models, bathymetry & tidal models used                                                                                                                                                 |  |
|            | Spatial scale           | The area the larvae can move                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |  |
|            | Time step               | The time step used to move the larvae using the oceanographic model (preferably in seconds)                                                                                                                                                       |  |
|            | Diffusion / turbulence  | Diffusion strategy (random walk, horizontal and/or vertical) and the turbulence values used                                                                                                                                                       |  |
| Biological | Release times           | Release times of the larvae                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |  |
|            | Release strategy        | How the larvae were released (e.g. daily, lunar, temperature cues, depths)                                                                                                                                                                        |  |
|            | Release sites           | The GPS locations and sizes of the release sites                                                                                                                                                                                                  |  |
|            | Settlement sites        | The GPS locations and sizes of the settlement sites (if different from the release sites)                                                                                                                                                         |  |
|            | Larvae released         | The number of larvae released                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |  |
|            | Pelagic larval duration | The pelagic larval duration of the taxa and whether you used a variable or fixed duration                                                                                                                                                         |  |
|            | Pre-competency period   | The pre-competency period given before settlement can occur                                                                                                                                                                                       |  |
|            | Movement strategies     | What movement strategies the larvae were given and the values associated with these strategies (e.g. passive, diel, horizontal)                                                                                                                   |  |
|            | Mortality strategies    | The mortality strategy used (if any)                                                                                                                                                                                                              |  |
|            | Settlement strategies   | How did the larvae choose a settlement site (e.g. passively, sites were buffered 10 km, sensory cues)                                                                                                                                             |  |

To advance our understanding of connectivity in marine systems, biophysical modelling studies need to start publishing consistent quantitative metrics of dispersal and connectivity so that comparisons can be made. Studies must also provide more transparency on the parameters used. The template is the basic information, seen to be necessary based on the review in Chapter 2. This template should be used as the basis for discussion amongst scientists in the field, but I actively encourage all researchers publishing the results of biophysical connectivity studies to adopt at least the principles of cohesion, consistency and transparency which are at its core. Such an approach will greatly speed advancements in our understanding of the drivers and outcomes of connectivity more generally. Ultimately it is confidence in the generality of the results of these models which, along with more empirical validation of the modelled output, will allow for their more widespread use within management and conservation initiatives.

## Future research

The results of Chapter 3 raises questions about the vertical distributions seen; firstly do they reflect actual behaviour, and secondly if they do vertically migrate why are different patterns seen between families. It has been argued that the patterns observed to do not relate to individual behaviour at all and could be a result of different mortality between ontogenetic stages and between species [@irisson2010]. As mentioned in Chapter 3, other drivers of vertical distribution could be due to environmental factors [@job2000; @aceves-medina2008; @lougee2002], metabolic [@wurtsbaugh1988], feeding strategies [@pearre2003; @llopiz2009], or predator avoidance. The patterns seen could also be snapshots in time of diel vertical migration patterns, and not specifically ontogenetic. The high mortality amongst larval fish also creates questions about whether the successful recruits follow vertical distribution patterns consistent with species or family level distributions, or they followed a different dispersal pattern. Our understanding of ontogenetic vertical migration behaviour is still cursory at best, it is known that these patterns exist and they influence dispersal, but why these patterns occur is still up for debate. Due to the influence of vertical migration on connectivity, it is important to understand the processes behind these patterns, and how warming oceans and ocean acidification might effect vertical migration and thus connectivity patterns.

BDMs are currently the most effective tool to measure connectivity over large-scale spatial and temporal scales, and advances in computing are only making connectivity modelling more realistic of natural processes and more accessible to researchers. The ability to manipulate parameters allows for understanding the influential processes of connectivity, as seen in Chapter 4. The results showed that OHS was the most influential behaviour for regional connectivity, and similar to vertical migration, the exact processes underlying the ability for reef fish to sense settlement habitat is unknown for many species. Suggested processes include sight [@berenshtein2014], sound [@sallares2009], smell [@gerlach2007a], magnetic compass [@bottesch2016], or hydrostatic pressure [@huebert2010]. Further research in understanding which processes contribute the most to the ability of ichthyoplankton to orient will provide more accurate BDMs with a realistic implementation of OHS behaviour. Other factors that influence swimming should be explored in BDM connectivity studies, such as effects of temperature and viscosity [@fuiman1997; @herbing2002] on connectivity patterns.

## Ocean acidification and connectivity

A caveat to some of the conclusions of this thesis is the likelihood that ocean acidification will adversely impact the sensory ability of ichthyoplankton, potentially reducing larval dispersal to a passive process [@leis2018]. Possibly forcing BDMs not to include OHS behaviour when predicting connectivity patterns. Research has shown that a common neurotransmitter, present in ichthyoplankton, is adversely affected at high CO~2~ levels predicted to occur at the end of the century [@nilsson2012; @nagelkerken2016]. Preliminary research into several species of ichthyoplankton has shown ocean acidification interferes with senses such as hearing [@rossi2016], vision [@allan2014], and chemosensation [@sundin2017; @ferrari2011], impairing the ability of fish to orientate towards settlement cues. Therefore, even if swimming ability is not affected by the predicted increased of CO~2~ in the ocean, undirected horizontal swimming is essentially passive transport with increased randomness, i.e. stronger turbulence, and has limited influence on connectivity. As stated in @leis2018, ocean acidification could jettison the biophysical dispersal paradigm, resulting in increased dispersal distance, lower local retention, lower self-recruitment, and lower settlement success.

## Conclusion

This thesis provides guidance on important biological processes for future connectivity studies, particularly for the ichthyoplankton dispersal of south-eastern Australia. Future connectivity studies hopefully utilise this research and include important dispersal influencing behaviours in BDMs, i.e. OHS and vertical migration (I described the ontogenetic vertical distribution patterns for seven families of ichthyoplankton that can be used to parameterisation). An outcome, which along with improved reproducibility of BDM studies, should strengthen the accuracy of modelled connectivity patterns. Using this thesis, conservation managers can feasibly use the modelled connectivity patterns of *E. daemelii* to produce more informed decisions for the population recovery of this threatened species, which has been elusive to date.

PAGEBREAK
