General Introduction
====================

Marine populations are structurally different to terrestrial populations as the conditions of fluid environment typically favour open populations. The ocean is a dynamic system, with currents transporting eggs or larvae, over potentially considerable distances, creating interconnected regions. Larval dispersal has been a topic of interest in marine ecology for over a century [@hjort1914; @hjort1926]. Traditionally the focus has been on larval supply and recruitment dynamics [@underwood1984; @gaines1985; @victor1983; @doherty1991], however recent advancements in the field have allowed us to investigate the where there recruited larvae come from, changing our understanding of how open these systems really are [@jones2005; @swearer1999a]. The spatial extent of this dispersal and the connectivity between areas, investigating where do the larvae go and where do the settled larvae come from, are important questions for marine ecology. Connectivity, for the purposes of this thesis, is defined as the exchange of individuals between spatially discrete populations [@cowen2009], these connected populations are in turn called a metapopulation [@hanski1998]. Metapopulations within the marine context, while having similarities with terrestrial metapopulations, are primarily focused on linking populations through the dispersal and recruitment of larvae [@sale2006a]. Connectivity within a metapopulation can be highly volatile due to intrinsic (e.g. low exchange of individuals) or extrinsic (e.g. natural variation in currents) events. The connectivity between populations is fundamental to the community dynamics (local and metapopulation levels), genetic diversity, and population persistence [@burgess2014; @lowe2010; @lett2015]. However, the influence of biological processes that contribute to this connectivity, the influence of variation in connectivity patterns on population dynamics, and the connectivity patterns exhibited by many marine species, are not fully understood [@cowen2007; @giangrande2017; @snyder2015]

Broad statement on thesis. What is this thesis trying to achieve?
-----------------------------------------------------------------

The central theme of this thesis is to contribute to the understanding of the processes that influence the dispersal and connectivity patterns of ichthyoplankton. The thesis is divided into four parts: a meta-analysis comparing studies to asses the trends and influence of biophysical dispersal modelling (BDM) parameters; collecting empirical data of ontogenetic vertical migration of larval fish, a process known to influence connectivity; using a BDM to investigate the influences of different behaviours, strategies and modelling choices on connectivity patterns; and finally synthesising the results to predict the connectivity patterns of a temperate reef fish using a BDM, and comparing these patterns with the current network of marine protected areas.

What is connectivity?
---------------------

Many marine species, including numerous species of reef fish, possess a two-stage lifecycle: pelagic larval and sessile adult stages. The can be striking differences in the morphology, habitat, and behaviour between these two stages of larval fish development [@leis2000]. Connectivity between populations (and within metapopulations) for species with this lifecycle occurs solely during this pelagic larval phase, unlike terrestrial animal species where connectivity mostly occurs through migrating adults. Pelagic larvae can disperse over long distances, hundreds or even thousands of kilometres, therefore measurement can be difficult [@levin2006]. The closest terrestrial similarity is with seed dispersal, but unlike seeds, fish larvae have inherent behaviours that can influence their dispersal [@cowen2009].

The majority of reef fish are oviparous, females either lay their eggs attached to a benthic substrate (e.g. rock or plant) or broadcast spawn them for males to fertilise. Fecundity can range from tens of thousands to millions of eggs, a strategy designed to offset the extremely high mortality rate for larval fish [i.e. greater than 99.95%; @houde1989]. Upon hatching, larval fish are not fully developed, and undergo morphological changes before becoming a settlement stage juvenile. The ontogenetic stages of larval fish are described around the development of the caudal fin, a process called flexion. Flexion is defines as when the notochord of a larval fish starts bending upwards at approximately 45 degrees to begin the formation of the caudal fin. Its with the development of this fin that larvae start to develop swimming abilities, changing them from planktonic to nektonic [@leis2006]. Preflexion is the time from hatching out of the egg until this flexion event, and postflexion describes development after the caudal fin has developed, but before the juvenile stage. The period the fish spends in this larval stage is called the pelagic larval duration (PLD). The PLD ends when the larvae settle, which requires them to be developed enough to swim and sense suitable settlement habitat. The length of this period is species-specific, but despite some variability, there is typically similarity within a taxonomic level [genus or family, [@victor2000; @wilson1999]. Variation within PLDs arise due to individual larva having flexibility in about the timing of settlement, albeit there are certain physiological limitations on the earliest and latest timing of settlement.

Connectivity patterns are the interface of a complex series of physical and biological processes. Connectivity starts with the spawning event, the timing and location of which is the most influential biological process [@puckett2014; @bauer2015; @donahue2015]. The highest contributing process to connectivity is the dispersal by ocean currents and hydrodynamics modelling of ocean systems is a mature field. Entrainment in oceanographic features such as mesoscale eddies can influence dispersal, changing the direction and increasing development of larvae [@graber1997; @shulzitski2015]. The length of PLD influences the connectivity, however there is no unifying theory [@koeck2015a; @treml2012; @mora2012]. It is now understood that fish larvae are not passively advected and once released into the plankton, ichthyoplankton start developing behaviours that can influence the pattern of dispersal. Vertical migration, diel and ontogenetic, is one such behaviour that allows larval fish to reduce their dispersal distance by moving away from the wind driven surface currents [@paris2004]. Reaching the developmental stage of flexion allows larvae to start swimming, often at speeds greater than the encompassing current advecting them [@fisher2000]. Larval fish also develop a suite of senses that allows them to detect and swim in the direction of settlement habitat [@gerlach2007a; @bottesch2016]. It is thought larvae must be close to some available settlement habitat before the the end of their pelagic larval duration or they die [@cowen2009].

Why is connectivity important?
------------------------------

Besides births and deaths, connectivity is the key process that defines the dynamics of both local and metapopulations. Local populations, subpopulations within a metapopulation, rely on stable connectivity from source populations in order to persist. Noting in marine systems the definition of a local populations can be a non-trivial task due to to the fluid environment, and often any movement of adults is ignored [@grimm2003]. This thesis focuses on ecologically relevant connectivity, i.e. demographic connectivity whereby dispersal effects population growth and persistence [@gotelli1991], and not genetic connectivity, which requires only a few individuals to be exchanged [@slatkin1993].

Understanding connectivity of marine systems is paramount for the conservation and management of metapopulations [@roberts1997]. An important instrument in the marine conservation toolbox is marine protected areas (MPAs) [@halpern2003; @lubchenco2003; @mellin2016]. Historically, habitat quality and habitat preservation have been the main priorities for marine conservation and connectivity has often been overlooked [@crowder2006]. Preserving habitat is an important facet of conservation, but does not provide the same ability for populations to recover from disturbance as well connected networks of protected areas [@almany2009]. Therefore to address population persistence, connectivity is now considered a key requirement when designing MPAs [@botsford2009; @christie2010; @abesamis2016; @jonsson2015; @smith2018]. However, designing a unified network its not without its difficulty [@kendall2015; @watson2012] or controversy [@roff2014] as marine species have different dispersal distances and the natural variation of extrinsic factors. Dynamic marine protected systems is recent paradigm [@smith2007] that can be utilised in conservation management to address this flux inherent in connectivity patterns [@soria2014].

How do we measure connectivity ?
--------------------------------

Connectivity is one of the more challenging problems to study empirically in marine ecology. Directly measuring ichthyoplankton connectivity with current techniques is frequently impractical (and often impossible). Larvae are minuscule (measured in mm) and exists within a vast oceanic environment. Larval fish are inherently difficult to track due to the combination of a PLD ranging from weeks to months that allows them to disperse long distances [@victor2000] and a high mortality rate meaning only a fraction of larvae spawned will settle [@houde1989]. Despite these difficulties, there are several direct and indirect methods for measuring dispersal, using natural and physical tags.

Natural markers are ubiquitous amongst larval fish, which makes them experimentally advantageous. Whe measuring connectivity, genetic material is the most common natural marker used. There are several different genetic methodologies for measuring dispersal, the two most common of which are to use genetic markers to compare gene flow either between populations or using parentage analysis to see where progeny disperse. Population level gene flow is more widely used, as its an indirect measure and requires less sampling effort. Quantifying connectivity through gene flow involves comparing genetic micro-satellite markers to determine if spatially discrete populations share any genetic material, giving evidence of dispersal events [@doherty1995; @curley2009; @foster2012]. The caveat to describing connectivity using gene flow is that it only provides information of historical dispersal events and it can be uncertain if the connectivity occurred between populations or indirectly through other populations. Parentage analysis on the other hand gives direct evidence of dispersal events, but it requires more arduous sampling of both parents and progeny. This technique uses genetic markers to identify the natal population of new recruits giving estimates of dispersal distance [@williamson2016], and with sufficient sampling can indicate the levels of self-recruitment in populations [@jones2005; @herrera2016]. The level of sampling increases in difficulty when considering increased spatial and temporal scales, however, new methodologies have shown that dispersal kernels can be estimated by only sampling 3% of the population [@bode2018]. Determining connectivity through genetic markers is a constantly changing field, with recent advancements e.g. genetic assignment tests on allele frequencies [@simpson2014], providing potential for greater insight into the dispersal movement between populations. Another useful natural marker for measuring the dispersal of larval fish is the elemental composition of an otolith, which can have markers of the surrounding chemical compositions of the water where the fish was spawned [@campana1999]. This technique has been used successfully to link adults with their juvenile nurseries in estuaries [@gillanders2003]. For this technique to be effective, the spatial regions of interest must have identifiably different chemical signatures, otherwise the true birth location can be hard to ascertain [@thorrold2002]. An inherent difficulty is that in marine and freshwater systems, the environmental markers are in constant flux and therefore constant monitoring is required to confidently predict dispersal using otoliths [@gillanders2002].

Using physical markers on larval fish are novel methodologies, developed in the last 15 years, that can directly measure connectivity [@cowen2009]. Trans-generational marking involves injecting adult breeding females with enriched stable-isotopes (e.g. ^137^Ba) that are passed onto each spawned egg and are incorporated into the otolith of the larvae [@thorrold2006]. Dispersal can be measured by sampling new recruits and detecting the stable isotope in the otolith. Studies have used this technique effectively to investigate connectivity of reef fish populations over small spatial scales [@almany2007] and even comparing inter-annual variability through exhaustive sampling [@cuif2015]. An advantage of trans-generational marking is that marking one female in turn marks each egg produced, reducing the amount of adults required to mark. Another advantage of this method is that by using different concentrations of the stable-isotope, different locations can be discerned. Physical tagging can also be applied using fluorescent chemical markers [@thorrold2002; @jones2005]. Fluorescent markers are more labour intensive than trans-generational markers as entire clutches of eggs needs to be stained, and can only provide information from a single location.

Direct and indirect empirical methods, as described above, can provide accurate measurements of dispersal success and distance, but are disadvantaged due to the labour intensive sampling effort required, especially over increasing spatial and temporal scales. These empirical sampling efforts can successfully measure the dispersal kernel over smaller spatial scales, but become almost impossible when considering long dispersal distances, e.g. coastal dispersal. In addition, low sample sizes lead to a lot of uncertainty in the results of these empirical methods, although statistical tools have been developed to address these issues [@kaplan2017].

An alternative method to empirical measurement is using a biophysical dispersal model (BDM) to predict potential connectivity patterns [@paris2007; @sponaugle2002; @treml2015]. The advantages of using predictive models is the ability to manipulate model parameters, and therefore ask questions that cannot be easily achieved with empirical methods, e.g. spatial extents ranging from localised reefs [@andutta2012] to global connectivity [@wood2013], and to investigate temporal patterns at intra-annual [@robins2013] and inter-annual [@young2012] timescales. BDMs also provide the ability to to investigate the influence of various processes on connectivity, physical and biological (traits and behaviours) that are difficult to measure empirically, specifically the behaviour of larval fish. Combining predictive patterns of connectivity with empirical measures is a powerful tool for inference of larval dispersal [@werner2007; @coscia2012; @foster2012].

BDMs are a mature research methodology, used in studies of larval dispersal for three decades [@bartsch1988] with increasing complexity [@miller2007]. BDMs consist of coupled physical and biological models, reflecting the complex interaction of processes on connectivity patterns. The physical model is a numerical hydrodynamic model, often combined with data assimilation techniques of observation systems to resolve mesoscale and sub-mesoscale oceanographic processes, e.g. fronts and eddies. Recent advances in computer power have allowed researchers to construct high resolution circulation model for regional dynamics, or lower resolution modes for more expansive oceanic regions. Ocean circulation models are well understood, however, the understanding of near-shore dynamics on connectivity (interaction of cross-shore and along-shore processes) is not as established [@largier2003].

Compared to the oceanography, the biological processes are less well understood. Biological models are slowly becoming more complex as our understanding of the early-life history of marine species improves. Individual based models are the most common type of BMDs, whereby the model advects individual particles encapsulating larval traits and behaviours through the hydrodynamic matrix. The biological models are often species-specific, using information gained from empirical studies of the early-life history for that particular species, but sometimes uses general information to describe a suite of species. Studies using species-specific models are often difficult due to the lack of available information on the early-life history of many species and often many assumptions must be made [@leis2007b]. Therefore both the identification of the key biological processes influencing connectivity and information on the behaviour of fish larvae are important areas of research.
The results of models are predictive only, and qualification on applications of these models is justified. Therefore another significant area of research must be on the validation of these models, from input parameters, to the modelled processes, and the resulting connectivity patterns.

Thesis outline
--------------

The main objective of this thesis was to investigate the processes that influence the dispersal and  connectivity patterns of ichthyoplankton. This question was answered through four specific, but interrelated data chapters. Firstly, where possible across common metrics, I identified the traits that were important for BDMs, both physical and biological, using a meta-analysis on the published BDM studies. Secondly, I gathered empirical data for one of the biological traits considered influential on connectivity patterns, for which there was a data gap in the region. Thirdly, using regional hydrodynamics, I investigated the influence of different behaviours, parametrisation of a specific behaviour, and methods of applying a specific behaviour on connectivity . Finally, synthesising these results, I explored the predicted connectivity patterns of an endemic and threatened reef fish, *Epinephelus daemelii* and determine any conservation management implications.

Three decades of research using biophysical dispersal models (BDMs) have provided numerous of examples of major findings and advances in connectivity research [@miller2007; @willis2011; @cowen2009]. As with any cohesive field of research, there is a collective aim to advance our overall understanding of the discipline. To move forward, generalities are sought, yet many studies produce conflicting results [@leis2013]. The first data chapter is a meta-analysis, evaluating published BDMs, identifying modelling decisions (both physical and biological), with the aim of building upon a previous review by @miller2007. The initial aim of the chapter was to identify trends in the inclusion and exclusion of modelling parameters, with the goal of understanding if these is a minimum suite of parameters that should be included in future BDM studies. More importantly, the final aim of the chapter was to understand the consequences of modelling choices on the resulting connectivity patterns. Common metrics were identified and compared across different parameter choices to understand the effects. These results provide a template for BDMs in the future by highlighting the outcomes of modelling choice, and identifying knowledge gaps in influential parameters choices.

The impetus for Chapter 3 was the knowledge gaps in the empirical data on the early life history of ichthyoplankton species of New South Wales (NSW). This knowledge gap can hinder connectivity research on specific species, as  it can force the exclusion in models of behavioural traits important to connectivity. Even with the information that is available on species, generalising within species, between species, and across regions is fraught with difficulties [@leis2007b]. Ontogenetic vertical migration is considered an important process in the connectivity of larval fish [@paris2007], and therefore I decided to gather data on these patterns for reef fish off the coast of NSW. The experiment consisted of 16 sites off the coast of NSW, sampling larval fish at three different depths. Larval fish were identified down to family level, and I analysed the seven reef associated families with the largest sample sizes; Labridae, Mullidae, Pomacentridae, Scaridae, Scorpaenidae, Serranidae, and Synodontidae. Larval fish at each depth were identified to ontogenetic stages described above, and the length measured. While there have been many larval fish assemblage studies off the NSW coast [@gray1993; @dempster1997; @matis2014], no previous study has specifically investigated the patterns of ontogenetic vertical distribution of reef fish. The effect of oceanographic features on connectivity pattern was also another consideration, with the aim to see if the ontogenetic distribution changed when larval fish were in coastal waters entrained by the East Australia Current or within an eddy.

Chapter 4 was a theoretical modelling study, testing the effect of different behaviours: passive, vertical advection (VA), diel vertical migration (DVM), ontogenetic vertical migration (OVM), and orientated horizontal swimming (OHS), on the connectivity patterns from a BDM of the New South Wales region. I developed a BDM using the recommendations of @north2009 and building upon other recently published studies. Understanding important behaviours to model in the region allow us know which behaviours to implement and where to focus the empirical research. The second aim of this chapter was to gain an understanding of the sensitivity of behaviours to different values and different methods, specifically OVM. Gaining insight into the importance of parameter choice helps us understand the impacts of using assumptions to parameterise models when empirical knowledge of a behaviour for a particular species is not available in from the literature.

The final chapter synthesised the results of each of the previous data chapters to investigate the connectivity of black cod (*Epinephelus daemelii*), a threatened reef fish endemic to NSW. I used the BDM developed for Chapter 3, configured to use the important behavioural traits for dispersal models identified in Chapters 2 and 4, and parameterised using the vertical distribution data gathered for Serranidae in Chapter 3. The larval dispersal patterns were generated during known spawning times across the eight year period (2004-2011) and across the known distribution within Australia. Comparisons were made between the connectivity patterns seen with larvae spawned across the known distribution, and larvae spawned from only regions with known aggregating populations. Finally, these connectivity patterns were compared to the current legislated network of marine protected areas, both under state and federal jurisdiction, and to identify if there are areas not currently protected that might assist *E. daemelii* in population recovery.
