# PRSS Application

I require an email from you approving this request.

## Justification and details of requested funding
The funding will be to attend a conference for AMSA Darwin 2017, where I have an accepted abstract to give a presentation.

Item                                 | Cost
-------------------------------------|------
Registration                         | $395
Flights (Singapore to Darwin return) | $650
Accommodation                        | $400
Food                                 | $150
Taxi to and from airport             | $50
TOTAL                                | $1645

## How will the activity or equipment listed above contribute towards the completion of your degree?
Attending the annual Australian Marine Sciences Association conference in Darwin, July 2017, will  allowed me to get feedback on my work from the domestic and international marine science researchers at the top of their fields. I will present on a chapter of my thesis, which will allow me to communicate my ideas and get critical feedback from peers. It will also enable me to make contacts with other researchers and students from Australia and the oceanic region, which will potentially lead to future collaborations and potential job prospects.

## Achievement related to research

### Publications
None to date.

### Conference presentations
* 2016 Poster: Connectivity of temperate reef fish along the eastern Australian coast and the effects of ontogenetic vertical migration. Ocean Sciences Meeting 2016, New Orleans, 21–26 February.
* 2015 Talk: Vertical distribution of temperate fish larvae off NSW. Australian Society of Fish Biology, Sydney, 11–14 October.
* 2015 Talk: Making sense of connectivity studies using a biophysical modelling approach. Australian Marine Sciences Association conference (AMSA), Geelong, 5–9 July.
* 2014 Talk: Modelling connectivity of reef fish: evaluating larval sources and the importance of biophysical transport process. Australian Marine Sciences Association conference (AMSA), Canberra, 6–10 July.

### Seminar
* 2015 Seminar: Connectivity of temperate reef fish in NSW, Tropical Marine Science Institute, National University of Singapore, 12 November.

### Awards
* 2014: Peter Holloway award for best student talk in oceanography at AMSA conference
