# AMSA 2018 Conference Abstract

## Theme: G2 LIFE-HISTORY AND CONNECTIVITY IN THE OCEAN
This session will have a biological perspective on the life history of marine organisms and their connectivity between habitats and across oceanic spheres. Presentations on population dynamics of marine species, in both near and offshore regions, and on migrations of marine species in the course of their life cycle are welcome. This includes how connectivity can improve the management and conservation of marine organisms. Presentations on functional connectivity, such as benthic-pelagic coupling, fit into this session as well.

## Title
Connectivity of the Black Cod along the NSW bioregion

## Abstract
The black cod (*Epinephelus daemelii*) is a threatened species, native to the south-western Pacific but mostly found along the NSW coastline. Throughout the 20th century it has suffered population declines from fishing pressure, considered both a valuable food fish and a spearfishing trophy due to its large size. It has been protected since 1983 in NSW and Commonwealth waters under conservation legislation, however population recovery has so far not been evident across its known distribution. This study aims to determine the connectivity of black cod from known spawning regions to further understand its distribution and life-history. Using a biophysical dispersal model, larvae with black cod life history parameters were released during April-May (2004-2011) from known areas of aggregation (Nambucca, Port Stephens, Solitary Islands, Lord Howe Island, and the offshore reefs Elizabeth and Middleton) and tracked to settlement sites (both reefs and intertidal rocky shores) along their known distribution. The results predicted high local retention for Solitary Islands, Nambucca and Port Stephens, but also high levels of self-recruitment, suggesting the current breeding populations are critical to persistence of juvenile populations in those regions. The relatively long pelagic larval duration (~45 days) allowed for connectivity from the spawning regions to most other regions in NSW (with a polewards direction due to the boundary currents). Connectivity between the offshore reefs (Lord Howe Island, Elizabeth and Middleton) and the NSW coast was also demonstrated, suggesting at least genetic, if not demographic connectivity between the known populations. Further empirical research is required to determine if juvenile populations can be predicted by the model, noting that post-settlement processes were not considered. This study provides important insights into the connectivity of black cod populations, which can be utilised with management tools to aid in the recovery of this vulnerable population.
