{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf460
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Georgia;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 In order to provide transparency and allow for useful comparisons between connectivity studies using biophysical models, we need a common approach to publishing both methods and results. We identified two main problems in the literature with connectivity studies preventing us from making meaningful comparisons. The first is a lack of commonality of  derived connectivity metrics amongst studies and incomplete reporting of metric values used. The second is the lack of reproducibility and clarity of the model parameters used in studies.\
\
To get consistency amongst metrics, our suggested approach is to utilise the two most common metrics currently reported. These provide useful measures and also they should be readily accepted amongst the research community (@tbl:metrics). The first metric, a connectivity matrix (or transition matrix), is the most useful for connectivity studies. The connectivity measures of self-recruitment, local retention and settlement success can all be calculated simply from the underlying matrix data (means of these values are also useful in publication for easy reference). Therefore, in addition to presenting the data in a heat map visualisation, the full connectivity matrix should be published. It is suggested these are published in an online data-repository or attached as supplementary information, rather than in the body of the paper. This is especially important where studies may have simulated a number of connectivity matrices for different situations (e.g. time periods, parameter combinations). The supplied matrices can be the summary of your data, e.g. if your study was conducted over a five year period, the matrix can be the mean connectivity over this period. However, if you vary a parameter such as PLD, different matrices should be supplied for each value used value used in order for such results to be more broadly useful to the field in the future. Graph theory is also a useful technique to assess the connectivity of a system. There are easily derived and comparable metrics, however, it can be hard to calculate the underlying values of the connectivity matrix, which makes it hard to compare against studies that do not also use a graph theory approach. So even where graph theory has been utilised, publishing the basic connectivity matrix is still important.\
\
: The five measures that are required to make comparative analysis from studies using biophysical connectivity models. \{#tbl:metrics\} \
\
| Metric              | Measure parameters            |\
| :------------------ | :-----------------            |\
| Connectivity matrix | Site-site connectivity values |\
|                     | Self-recruitment              |\
|                     | Local retention               |\
|                     | Dispersal success             |\
| Dispersal kernel    | Mean distance travelled       |\
|                     | Median distance travelled     |\
|                     | Maximum distance travelled    |\
|                     | Measure of spread             |\
\
The second most important metric used to describe the output of these models is the dispersal kernel. The dispersal kernel\'97\'97a probability density function\'97\'97gives information about the spread and distance of dispersed the particles in the system. Distance travelled is the most common measure supplied with the dispersal kernel and we suggest providing the mean, median and maximum distance travelled to allow for comparisons between studies, along with the distribution of the dispersal kernel. Note that when we talk about distance, we are referring to actual distance travelled, therefore when other distances such as straight-line or alongshore distances are used it is important to define this. There is no consensus for a measure used for spread. A few of studies in our review used a measure called positive or seeded area, which counted all the cells in the system that had greater than one particle to get a measure of spread. Another two studies tried to calculate the centre of the mass of particles to see how it changed over time. The positive area measure holds potential though it would need to be standardised to the size of the cells used in the model.\
\
To provide transparency between studies on how the biophysical model is implemented, we have provided a non-exhaustive list of the sort of parameters required to reproduce these studies (@tbl:open). The list covers parameters used for both the physical and biological models. This is not definitive, models will increasingly become more complex and there will be more parameters added to the initialisation of the models. For reproducibility purposes, an individual set of parameter values should be supplied for every model run used in the study. Again, these can be supplied in the supporting information or online in a data repository.\
\
: List of input parameters to a biophysical model that should be published as part of every connectivity study using a biophysical model. All values should be published in the appropriate SI units where applicable. The supplied column list the percentage of studies that included this information at the time of publication \{#tbl:open\}\
\
|   Model    |           Name          |   Description                        |\
|------------|-------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------| \
| Particle   | Particle model          | Link to the source code of the particle model used and specifications with information on type, movement and integration methods e.g. Individual based model, with Lagrangian model and it uses Runge-Kutta fourth order method for integration | \
|            | Random number seed                        |   If random numbers are used, it is important to publish the seed used to generate the random number so the study can be replicated \{Sandve:2013gh\}                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | \
| Physical   | Oceanographic model     | Link to the specifications of the model, including all sub-models, bathymetry & tidal models used                                                                                                                                               | \
|            | Spatial scale           | The area the particles can move                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |\
|            | Time step               | The time step used to move the particles using the oceanographic model (preferably in seconds)                                                                                                                                                  |\
|            | Diffusion / turbulence  | Diffusion strategy (random walk, horizontal and/or vertical) and the turbulence values used                                                                                                                                                     |\
| Biological | Release times           | Release times of the particles                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |\
|            | Release strategy        | How the particles were released (e.g. daily, lunar, temperature cues, depths)                                                                                                                                                                   |\
|            | Release sites           | The GPS locations and sizes of the release sites                                                                                                                                                                                                |\
|            | Settlement sites        | The GPS locations and sizes of the settlement sites (if different from the release sites)                                                                                                                                                       |\
|            | Particles released      | The number of particles released                                                                                                                                                                        |\
|            | Pelagic larval duration | The pelagic larval duration of the taxa and whether you used a variable or fixed duration                                                                                                                                                       |\
|            | Pre-competency period   | The pre-competency period given before settlement could occur                                                                                                                                                                                   |\
|            | Movement strategies     | What movement strategies were the particles given and the values associated with these strategies (e.g. passive, diel, horizontal)                                                                                                              |\
|            | Mortality strategies    | The mortality strategy used (if any)                                                                                                                                                                                                            |\
|            | Settlement strategies   | How did the particles choose a settlement site (e.g. passively, sites were buffered 10 kms, sensory cues)}