{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf460
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Georgia;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 Biophysical models are an increasingly popular tool in studying marine population connectivity. These models offer the ability to perform analyses of connectivity patterns over temporal and spatial scales that are not possible with empirical techniques. In addition, biophysical models allow for the investigation of the early-life history traits of marine species that influence connectivity. The proliferation of biophysical transport modelling studies should allow for analysis of emergent generalities about the fundamental parameters and processes driving population connectivity which can then served to inform conservation and management initiatives.  In a review of 59 recent studies (published between 2010-2015) we found two key issues to be limiting our ability to synthesise results from across this diverse array of studies; 1) there was a general inconsistency in reporting of response metrics from these models; and 2) there was a lack of transparency in the values of parameters used as input to these models, creating a lack of reproducibility. Here we provide a summary of the pitfalls created by these two issues and importantly suggest a common approach to the metrics that are reported and a list of parameters to biophysical connectivity studies that are essential for reproducibility. We feel having a consistent approach will allow us to mature the field and encourage greater confidence in connectivity studies. This is important as connectivity studies become drivers of management decisions such as designing marine protected areas or the conservation of specific sub-populations within a range.}