{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf460
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Georgia;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 Biophysical models (also known as coupled physical-biological models) have become a popular tool in advancing our understanding of the connectivity patterns of various marine species \{SanvicenteAnorve:2014bl\}\{Koeck:2015bf\}\{Andrello:2014ge\}. These models are not a new technique, biophysical models first started appearing in the literature almost 30 years ago \{Bartsch:1988vg\}. It is an area of research that is increasing in its popularity. A review of the 17 year period between 1989-2006 found 69 studies that utilised biophysical models \{Miller:2007iu\} and in our own 6 year search from 2010-2015 (described below), we found 59 studies fitting this criteria. Biophysical models, as the name suggests, produce potential patterns of connectivity using a physical (i.e. oceanographic) model coupled with a biological model. These models are particularly relevant for connectivity in marine systems, as dispersal during a pelagic larval stage is a key driver of connectivity for many species \{Cowen:2009fm\}. The two models are coupled together, because while oceanic processes are the presiding driver of dispersal, biological processes also have highly influential roles \{Leis:2006kf\}\{Pineda:2007bv\}. \
\
Biophysical models are powerful research tools, allowing us to investigate connectivity patterns over large spatial scales \{Andrello:2013cc\}\{Treml:2015bt\} and also over long temporal scales \{Richar:2014cg\}\{Berglund:2012cr\}, that are impossible with empirical studies. Another powerful research technique these models provide is the ability to investigate how early-life history traits (e.g. mortality, swimming ability, and orientation) affect the patterns of connectivity studies \{Butler:2011wu\}\{Staaterman:2012ek\}. It allows us to ask important question about how these factors influence connectivity; experiments that are largely intractable *in situ* due to the inherent difficulties of working with larvae of marine species.\
\
This 30 year history of connectivity research using biophysical transport models is filled with numerous examples of major findings, advances and generally high quality studies. As with any cohesive field of research, there is a collective aim to advance our overall understanding of the discipline.  For instance, what are typical levels of connectivity that one can expect for different types of system and life histories?  Are there generalities to the importance of factors like larval behaviour (swimming speed, sensory ability, settlement cues) or even aspects of the forcing models (time steps, resolution, integration method) that profoundly affect connectivity outcomes.  Does a longer pelagic larval duration (PLD) increase the size of the dispersal kernel or can a species limit how far they disperse through vertical migration? The establishment, where possibly, of generalities to these and other issues allows the field to progress.  It provides guidance for new studies, allowing them to build on previous ones.  This process is critical to the use of biophysical connectivity model outputs in management where there is an expectation that they will be accurate and useful across a broad range of scenarios.\
\
While the long history of excellent research in this field provides the substance for some excellent synthetic understanding, we would suggest that our progress in this area is being restrained by limitations in two key areas of published studies: 1) inconsistencies in the reporting of response metrics and 2) lack of model and parameter transparency. In order to evaluate the validity of this supposition we conducted a review of biophysical connectivity studies published between 2010 and 2015. We chose to evaluate this recent period as it would represent the \'91best case\'92 scenario in terms of data availability and of course the most realistic case of how the various aspects of these studies will be reported in the near future.  Our review used the keywords connectivity, model* and marine, querying the online search engines ISI Web of Knowledge and SCOPUS. In total we found 59 studies matching these criteria within this period, consisting of 248 contributing authors and published in 31 different journals (the full list of references is provided in the Supplementary materials). \
\
For each study in the review we recorded its location and scope, the input parameters for the physical (e.g.\'a0hydrodynamic models used) and biological models (e.g behaviours implemented, spawning times), the response metrics and analyses used. There were several different aims for these connectivity studies; modelling dispersal & settlement of marine species (77% of studies), assessing the connectivity of marine protected areas (15% of studies), investigating how early-life history parameters shape dispersal (5% of studies), and investigating the effects of climate change on connectivity (3% of studies). Most studies modelled a specific species (covering a wide variety of taxa), only five studies took a generic approach to input parameters. Fish were the most common taxon modelled (44% of studies), followed by molluscs (24%) and crustaceans (10%). Below we discuss our findings from the reviewed studies for each of the two key issues we highlighted above.}