{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf460
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Georgia;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 A trait common to nearly all biophysical connectivity studies is that they are attempting to estimate at least one of two fundamental and general patterns; 1) levels of  connectivity between natal and settlement sites and 2) dispersal distance of particles in the system generally. The first is essentially a measure of larval source-sink dynamics, looking at patterns of production and settlement in marine species that inherently links one patch in the system to another. The second is a measure of the total dispersal area, looking at issues such as how far the particles travel and where they occur in highest densities in the system. Both are broadly useful in describing system connectivity and dispersal and are a product of the system and modelling environment. In undertaking this review, we came across two impediments to a meta-analysis of these estimated metrics. Firstly, many studies utilised their own unique metric in measuring either of these patterns. In fact, we found over 30 different measures used to describe the patterns of connectivity & dispersal in these 59 papers. Secondly, for a given metric, often only a single summary statistic was reported, e.g.\'a0mean, median, or upper quartile. Summary statistic are useful, however they were often reported without information on the underlying dispersal distribution, making rigorous qualitative comparisons difficult at best. \
\
The most common metrics of connectivity and dispersal found in the dataset related to distances travelled by particles (dispersal metric) and connectivity measures of self-recruitment, local-retention and settlement success (@tbl:common). This commonality was quite useful and is no-doubt a response to the focus on local retention of larvae in coral reef literature over the past 15 years \{Jones:2005jj\}\{Berumen:2012ex\}\{Buston:2012jq\}. But even here there was confusion about the definitions of self-recruitment and local retention, with these terms often used interchangeably or synonymously with other terms such as self-connectivity. \{Burgess:2014cf\} stated the definitions clearly and succinctly; local retention is the fraction of offspring produced by a population, which also recruits into that population, and self-recruitment is the fraction of recruitment to a site comprised of individuals born in that site.\
\
: Those most common metrics published in the connectivity studies evaluated in this review and the parameters reported per metric used. \{#tbl:common\} \
\
|        Metric       |        Measure parameters        |  Reported(%) |\
| ------------------- | ----------------------- | :-------: |\
| Dispersal kernel    |                         | **72.9** |\
|                     | Mean distance travelled           | 57.1     |\
|                     | Maximum distance travelled        | 33.3     |\
|                     | Median distance travelled         | 11.9     |\
|                     | Upper quartile distance travelled | 11.9     |\
|                     | Minimum distance travelled        | 4.8      |\
| Connectivity matrix |                         | **59.3** |\
|                     | Self-recruitment        | 70.0     |\
|                     | Local retention         | 62.0     |\
|                     | Dispersal success      | 42.0     |\
| Graph theory metrics        |                         | **10.2** |  \
\
\
The three most common ways of reporting connectivity were metrics to do with dispersal kernels (72.9%), connectivity matrices (59.3%) or graph theory (10.2%). A dispersal kernel is a frequency histogram of the distance travelled by individual particles which provides a measure of the distance dispersed in the system. Dispersal kernels are often overlaid on GIS images of the study area, in order to give the reader a better understanding of the spread and concentration of the advected particles. The most common metric reported from the dispersal kernel is distance travelled (% of studies), however, the summary statistics used vary from mean (57.1%), maximum (33.3%), median (11.9%), upper quartile (11.9%), and the minimum distance travelled (4.8%; @tbl:common). These usefulness of a given metric will change depending on the distribution of the dispersal kernel, which is shaped by both geographic features and prevailing currents. Thus in most cases, the omission of any mention or visualisation of the general shape of the distribution (65% of studies that included a dispersal kernel) made it quite difficult to interpret the utility of the reported metric describing it. For instance average distances travelled may be of little use where the underlying distribution is quite right skewed (common in dispersal studies). There was also no consensus on how best to report the breadth of the dispersal distance distribution with studies reporting various metrics such as a dispersion index (defined as the number of particles in an area, multiplied by the distance from the natal site and normalised by the particles released; \{Pearce:2011fa\}, positive area (defined as the sum of the particles in a unit area; \{Andrello:2014ge\}, and isotropy (defined as measuring the variance of distribution around the mean geographic location of the particles; \{Ayata:2010hg\}. \
\
The next most common metric for publishing the results of a biophysical connectivity study in our review, was to use a connectivity matrix (also known as a transition matrix) as a measure of connectivity between sites (59% of studies) and a dispersal kernel as a measure of spread (71% of studies). A connectivity matrix is a square matrix with rows representing source sites and columns representing settlement sites. The diagonal of the matrix represents self-recruitment and each column, above and below the diagonal shows where settlers are coming from and where particles are settling too. Connectivity matrices are represented as either the potential connectivity (absolute values) or realised connectivity (percentage), which is the potential connectivity, normalised by the number of particles released. The most common metrics reported from these matrices are self-recruitment (70% of studies with a connectivity matrix), local retention (62%), and dispersal success (defined as the percentage of particles that successfully settle; 42%; @tbl:common). \
\
Another approach is to use graph theory to describe the connectivity (10.2% of studies). Treating sites as nodes, powerful metrics can be calculated to give a measure of connectivity between sites. Graph theory has the advantage of being a mature field in mathematics and it is a useful tool. However, like connectivity matrices, it requires the underlying data from the network graph for us to be able to get a more nuanced understanding. \
\
Both connectivity matrices and dispersal kernels are commonly depicted using heat maps, graphical techniques where a colour system is used to represent numbers. For connectivity matrices heat maps can easily identifying larval source and sink sites in the system,and for dispersal kernels they are useful in depicting where the highest and lowest densities of dispersal occur. Heat maps are a great visualisation tool for the reader and are to be encouraged, however, it restricts what information which can be extracted from the graph for further meta-analysis. In general, the range of values depicted are large, and thus they are binned for visualisation, resulting in information loss. As an example of the difficulty in known the underlying values, consider the heat map (@fig:heatmap). Of the studies that published a data from a connectivity matrix, only 35% supplied the actual matrix data as represented in @fig:heatmap. Comparative quantitative metrics are essential for analysis between studies, which becomes difficult if the connectivity matrix depicted using a heat map is all that is published as part of the results. \
\
![The probability of larval transport and settlement (as a % of total larvae released from a site) amongst 10 sites (S1-S10) within a simple metapopulation (a) and a simplified heat map of this same data (b) which would be typically used to present the data in a publication. Note that connectivity values derived from the heat map could be up to 50% different from actual values under the binning scheme used here.](figures/cm_matrix.tiff)\{#fig:heatmap\}}