Title: Modelling the connectivity of the black cod (Epinephelus daemelii): is there overlap with the current MPA network?

The black cod *Epinephelus daemelii* is a large, long-lived reef fish of the family Serranidae, found mostly along the New South Wales (NSW) coastline. Listed as a threatened species since 1983, due to population declines from fishing pressure throughout the 20th century. NSW (and Commonwealth waters) has a network of marine protected areas (MPA) that have effectively been in place since 2007, albeit the size of no take zones within each MPA varies. Despite most known *E. daemelii* populations occurring within MPAs, the populations do not appear to be recovering. One explanation is that the current MPA network does not meet its objectives for *E. daemelii*. The aims of this study was to investigate the connectivity of *E. daemelii* along its known distribution, identifying potential strong spawning regions and regions of strong settlement. Using a biophysical dispersal model, larvae were released during April-May (2004-2011) from 19 known regions across its distribution and tracked until settlement (both reefs and intertidal rocky shores). Using the modelled connectivity, we can predict areas where *E. daemelii* could benefit from additional protection. We identified four strongly connected communities across the distribution. While each community contained marine protected areas (and no take areas), we identified areas in the northern and central communities with strong settlement success, high local retention and strong stable settlement, where additional protection might be beneficial. This study provides insights into the connectivity of *E. daemelii* in the NSW region, which can be utilised by conservation managers to aid in its recovery.
