# Abstract

Connectivity in marine systems is defined as the exchange of individuals between spatially distinct populations. For most marine populations, due to sedentary adults, connectivity occurs during the pelagic larval phase with prevailing currents can transporting larvae considerable distances to settle amongst other populations. Research has increasingly demonstrated that species-specific biological traits, e.g. vertical migration and sensory abilities, can influence where larvae settle. Biophysical dispersal models (BDMs) — a hydrodynamic model coupled with a biological model — lend themselves to inferring potential connectivity patterns, as experimental studies using current methods are inherently difficult over extended spatial and temporal scales. Biophysical dispersal models are complex whereby [Minor 1001]{.comment-start id="1001" author="Reviewer 1"}the combination of the two models produces many input parameters[]{.comment-end id="1001"} that can potentially affect the output of the BDM. Many studies now use a BDM approach to measure connectivity. Therefore, it is essential to [Minor 1002]{.comment-start id="1002" author="Reviewer 1"}understand how sensitivity of parameters in predicting dispersal patterns[]{.comment-end id="1002"}, to determine the traits modellers should include. Increasing [Minor 1003]{.comment-start id="1003" author="Reviewer 1"}the realism (and hopefully in turn the accuracy and precision[]{.comment-end id="1003"} of models leads to better understanding of the connectivity between marine populations, with significant conservation implications for the design of marine protected areas. This thesis explored the biological processes that affect the connectivity patterns of ichthyoplankton using four related data chapters. The first data chapter, a meta-analysis of connectivity studies using BDMs, investigated both trends and consequences of modelling choices on derived connectivity patterns. The four most common metrics were identified (i.e. local retention, self-recruitment, settlement success, and dispersal distance) were used to compare the influence of different parameters. Even though not all studies reported all or any of these metrics, considerable variation was found amongst the reported values. Some patterns for both physical and biological modelling choices were discerned despite challenges in comparing BDM studies to the high number of modelling choices and lack of identifiable standard amongst reported metrics of connectivity patterns. The results of this meta-analysis provide a useful framework on [Minor 1004]{.comment-start id="1004" author="Reviewer 1"}parameter[]{.comment-end id="1004"} choice for future consideration of connectivity studies. The second data chapter is an experiment measuring the ontogenetic vertical migration of reef fish off the coast of south-eastern Australia. The ichthyoplankton of seven reef-associated families were collected at three different depth ranges (0-5m, 5-50m, 50-100m), assessed for the ontogenetic stage (pre-flexion, flexion or post-flexion) and measured for total length (mm). Vertical migration patterns were found to differ between each family. The ichthyoplankton sampled demonstrated deeper migration with both increasing ontogenetic stage and length. The only family that displayed an opposite trend was Mullidae. There was no change in vertical ontogenetic distribution between coastal or eddy waters; however, eddies entrained more developed and longer larvae. The third data chapter is a theoretical modelling chapter that investigated the effect of different swimming behaviours (e.g. no swimming, diel vertical migration (DVM), ontogenetic vertical migration (OVM), and orientated horizontal swimming (OHS)) and differences in the parameterisation and implementation of OVM in a BDM. The most important behaviour on connectivity patterns along the coastline of south-eastern Australia was OHS. Differences in the implementation of OVM had a stronger effect on connectivity patterns than differences in the OVM strategies. The fourth data chapter synthesised the results from the previous three data chapters and explored the predicted connectivity patterns of an endemic and threatened Australian reef fish, the black cod (*Epinephelus daemelii*) using a BDM. *E. daemelii* larvae showed strong connections to both the natal and proximate regions. Four subpopulations were resolved, with three along the coast of New South Wales (NSW), separated by latitude, and an off-shore population comprising Elizabeth Reef, Middleton Reef, and Lord Howe Island. Within the context of the current marine protected area (MPA) network of NSW, strong settlement regions (released from both known regions of aggregation and across the known distribution) had only moderate or no sanctuary zone coverage (i.e. no-take areas). Settlement regions where additional protection could be beneficial to the recovery of the *E. daemelii* population were identified, e.g. Yamba. The results of this thesis increase our understanding of the influence of behaviour on connectivity patterns and identify methods for researchers to advancing BDM studies, with the aim engendering greater realism across derived connectivity patterns [Minor 1005]{.comment-start id="1005" author="Reviewer 1"}for marine larvae along the eastern Australian coast.[]{.comment-end id="1005"} 

PAGEBREAK
